Thank you for downloading the free e-book library ModernLib.Ru All author of the book: http://modernlib.ru/books/tolstoy_lev_nikolaevich/ The same book in other formats: http://modernlib.ru/books/tolstoy_lev_nikolaevich/voyna_i_mir_tom_1/ Bon read! War and Peace. Volume 1 Leo Tolstoy Leo Tolstoy, War and Peace, Volume 1 Leo Tolstoy War and Peace 1 PART ONE I - Eh bien, mon prince. Genes et Lucques ne sont plus que des apanages, des estates, de la famille Buonaparte. Non, je vous previens, que si vous ne me dites pas, que nous avons la guerre, si vous vous permettez encore de pallier toutes les infamies, toutes les atrocites de cet Antichrist (ma parole, j'y crois) - je ne vous connais plus, vous n'etes plus mon ami, vous n'etes plus my faithful servant, comme vous dites. [Well, Prince, Genoa and Lucca became no longer how to put Bonaparte family. No, I'm warning you, if you do not tell me that we have a war, if you still afford to protect all muck, all the horrors of the Antichrist (the right, I believe he is the Antichrist) - I do not know any more, you really do not my friend, you are so not my faithful servant, as you say. ] Well, hello, hello. Je vois que je vous fais peur, [I see that I scare you] sit down and tell me. Thus spoke in July 1805 known Anna Pavlovna Scherer, maid of honor, and approximate the Empress Maria Feodorovna, meetings are important and bureaucratic Prince Vasili, who came first to her evening. Anna Pavlovna was coughing a few days, she had the flu, she said (grippbyl then a new word, used only rare). In a note sent out in the morning with red footman, was written without distinction in all: «Si vous n'avez rien de mieux a faire, M. le comte (or mon prince), et si la perspective de passer la soiree chez une pauvre malade ne vous effraye pas trop, je serai charmee de vous voir chez moi entre 7 et 10 heures. Annette Scherer ». [Y If you graph (or prince), there is nothing better in mind and if the prospect of the evening in a poor patient does not scare you too much, I will be very glad to see you today at between seven and ten hours. Anna Scherer. ] - Dieu, quelle virulente sortie [Oh! a brutal attack! ] - responsible, does not bother with such a meeting, which entered the prince at the court, embroidered uniform, stockings, shoes under the stars with a bright expression of the flat face. He spoke at the elegant French, which not only spoke but thought our grandfathers, and those quiet, patronizing intonations which are peculiar sostarevshemusya in the light and in the court significant person. He went up to Anna Pavlovna, kissed her hand, offered her a perfumed and shining bald head, and calmly sat down on the couch. - Avant tout dites moi, comment vous allez, chere amie? [First of all, tell me, how is your health? ] Calm the other, - he said, without changing the voice and tone that due decorum and participation shone indifference and even ridicule. - How can you be healthy ... when moral suffering? Is it possible to remain calm in our time, when a person has a sense? - said Anna Pavlovna. - You all night with me, I hope? - A British envoy holiday? Now Sereda. I have to appear there, - said the prince. - Daughter pick me up and take me. - I thought this holiday was canceled. Je vous avoue que toutes ces fetes et tous ces feux d'artifice commencent a devenir insipides. [I confess all these festivities and fireworks are becoming unbearable. ] - If you knew that you want it, the holiday would be canceled - said the prince, out of habit, like a wound clock, saying things he did not want to believe. - Ne me tourmentez pas. Eh bien, qu'a-t-on decide par rapport a la depeche de Novosiizoff? Vous savez tout. [Do not torture me. Well, that decided on the occasion of dispatch Novosiltsova? You all know. ] - How do you say? - said the prince, cold, bored tone. - Qu'a-t-on decide? On a decide que Buonaparte a brule ses vaisseaux, et je crois que nous sommes en train de bruler les notres. [What do you think? We decided that Buonaparte has burnt his ships; and we, too, seems to be ready to burn ours. ] - Prince Vasili always spoke languidly, like an actor said the role of the old piesy. Anna Pavlovna Scherer, on the contrary, despite her forty years, was filled with revitalizing and impulses. Being an enthusiast had become her social status, and sometimes, even when she did not want to, it is not to deceive the expectations of the people who knew her, was made an enthusiast. Restrained smile, play continuously on the face of Anna Pavlovna, though did not go to her outdated features, expressed, like spoiled children, a constant awareness of his lack of sweet, from which she did not want to, can not and does not find it necessary to be corrected. In the middle of a conversation about political actions, Anna Pavlovna overheated. - Oh, do not talk to me about Austria! I do not understand, maybe, but Austria never wanted and does not want war. It betrays us. Russia, one has to be the savior of Europe. Our benefactor knows his high calling and will be faithful to him. Here is what I believe. Our good and wonderful sovereign to be the greatest role in the world, and he is so virtuous and good that God would not leave him, and he will fulfill his calling to crush the hydra of revolution, which is now even worse in the person of this murderer and villain. We alone must atone for the blood of the righteous man ... Who do we hope, I ask you? ... England with her commercial spirit will not understand and can not understand the full height of the soul of the Emperor Alexander. She refused to clean Malta. She wants to see, looking back the idea of ​​our actions. What they said Novosiltsovu? ... Nothing. They do not realize they can not understand self-sacrifice of our Emperor who wants nothing for himself and wants everything for the good of the world. And what they promised? Nothing. And what they were promised, and that will not happen! Prussia already announced that Bonaparte is invincible, and that all of Europe can not do anything against it ... And I do not believe a single word nor Hardenberg or Gaugvitsu. Cette fameuse neutralite prussienne, ce n'est qu'un piege. [This notorious Prussian neutrality - just a trap. ] I believe in one God and in the high destiny of our beloved Emperor. He will save Europe! ... - she suddenly stopped to smile mocking his vehemence. - I think - said the prince, smiling - that if you have been sent instead of our dear Winzegorode you'd stormed consent of the King of Prussia. You are so eloquent. You give me some tea? - Now. A propos, - she added, soothe again - now I have two very interesting person, le vicomte de MorteMariet, il est allie aux Montmorency par les Rohans, [By the way, - Viscount Mortemart,] he relationship with the Montmorency through Rohan] one of the best French families. This is one of the good emigrants from this. And then l'abbe Morio: [Abbe Morio:] You know this deep mind? He was received by the Emperor. You know? - BUT! I'm very happy, - said the prince. - Tell me, - he added, as if just remembering something, and especially-casually, whereas what he asked, was the main purpose of his visit - the truth is that l'imperatrice-mere [Empress-mother] wants the appointment of Baron Funke's first secretary in Vienna? C'est un pauvre sire, ce baron, a ce qu'il parait. [This Baron seems to be an insignificant person. ] - Prince Vasili wished to identify her son to this place, which is by the Empress Maria Feodorovnu tried to deliver the Baron. Anna Pavlovna almost closed her eyes as a sign that neither she nor anyone else can not judge about that, or anything like the Empress. - Monsieur le baron de Funke a ete recommande a l'imperatrice-mere par sa soeur, [Baron Funke it recommended to the Empress-mother sister] - she said only a sad, dry tone. At that time, Anna Pavlovna called the Empress, her face suddenly presented a deep and sincere expression of devotion and respect, coupled with sadness that it happened every time she mentioned in a conversation about his high patron. She said that Her Majesty had deigned to give Baron Funke beaucoup d'estime, [a lot of respect], and her gaze was covered in sadness again. The prince was silent indifference. Anna Pavlovna, with her characteristic courtly and feminine agility and swiftness of the measure, and wanted schelkonut prince because he dared to respond because of the person recommended to the empress, and at the same time to console him. - Mais a propos de votre famille, [Speaking of your family] - she said - you know that your daughter as long as leaves, fait les delices de tout le monde. On la trouve belle, comme le jour. [Is delight of the whole society. It is a beautiful as the day. ] Prince leaned out of respect and gratitude. - I often think - Anna Pavlovna continued after a moment of silence, moving to the prince and gently smiling at him, as though showing it, that the political and small talk was over and now begins the sincere - I often think how unfairly sometimes shared the happiness of life. For what fate has given you these two nice children (excluding Anatole, your youngest, I do not like him - put it flatly, raising his eyebrows) - such lovely children? And you're right, at least most of them, and because they do not deserve. And she smiled at his ecstatic smile. - Que voulez-vous? Lafater aurait dit que je n'ai pas la bosse de la paterienite, [What do you want? Lavater would have said that I do not have bumps parental love] - said the prince. - Stop joking. I wanted to have a serious talk with you. You know, I'm unhappy with your smaller son. Between us be it said (her face assumed a sad expression), they are talked about her Majesty and Prince ... pity you did not answer, but she was silent, looking significantly at him, waiting for an answer. Prince Vasili frowned. - What do you want me to do! - he said at last. - You know, I have done for their education all that can the father and the two went out des imbeciles. [Fools. ] Hippolytus, at least, the late fool, but Anatole - restless. That's one difference - he said, smiling more unnaturally and animatedly than usual, and at the same time showing particularly sharp in the existing wrinkles around his mouth something unexpectedly coarse and unpleasant. - And what are born children of such people like you? If you were not my father, I would have nothing to reproach you could not, - said Anna Pavlovna, looking up pensively. - Je suis votre [I am your] faithful servant, et a vous seule je puis l'avouer. My children - ce sont les entraves de mon existence. [One you can admit it. My children - a burden of my existence. ] - He paused, a gesture expressing his obedience to the cruel fate. Anna Pavlovna thought. - Have you ever thought about how to marry your prodigal son Anatole? Say, - she said - that old maid ont la manie des Marieiages. [Have a mania to marry. ] I still do not feel for him this weakness, but I do have one petite personne [little person], which is very unhappy with her father, une parente a nous, une princesse [our cousin, Princess] Bolkonskaya. - Prince Vasili did not reply, although with peculiar to secular people and memory speed considerations show the movement of the head, he took philosophy that information. - No, you know that this Anatol costs me 40,000 a year - he said, apparently unable to hold the sad course of his thoughts. He paused. - What will happen in five years if it goes wrong? Voila l'avantage d'etre pere. [That's the benefit to be a father. ] It is rich, your princess? - My father is very rich and stingy. He lives in the village. You know, the famous Prince Bolkonsky, even the retired under the late emperor and nicknamed the King of Prussia. He's a very smart man, but with a strange and difficult. La pauvre petite est malheureuse, comme les pierres. [Poor unhappy, like stones. ] Her brother, that's what the newly married Lise Mayne, an adjutant of Kutuzov. He will now have me. - Ecoutez, chere Annette, [Listen, dear Annette,] - said the prince, suddenly taking his companion by the arm and bending down her somehow downward. - Arrangez-moi cette affaire et je suis votre [Arrange me this thing, and I'm forever yours] faithful servant a tout jamais pan, comme mon elder m'ecrit des [writes me my elder] Dispatches: peace-er-n! . She's a good family and rich. All I need. And it is with those free and familiarly graceful movements which distinguished him, he took the hand maid of honor, kissed her, kissed and waved freylinskoyu hand, lounging on the chairs and looking away. - Attendez [Wait], - said Anna Pavlovna, wondering. - I now also speak Lise (la femme du jeune Bolkonsky). [Lisa (wife young Bolkdnski). ] And, perhaps, it will be settled. Ce sera dans votre famille, que je ferai mon apprentissage de vieille fille. [I'm in your family will begin to learn the craft of old maids. ] II Living Pavlova gradually began to fill. She came to know the highest Petersburg, people are the most diverse on the age and nature, but at the same society in which all lived; came the daughter of Prince Vasili, beautiful Helene, came for his father to go with him on messenger holiday. She was in a cipher and a ball gown. He came and known as la femme la plus seduisante de Petersbourg [the most charming woman in St. Petersburg], young, little princess Bolkonskaya, last winter married and no longer travel to bolshoysvet because of her pregnancy, but also to small ezdivshaya evening. Came Prince Hippolyte, son of Prince Vasili, with Mortemart, whom he introduced; I came and Abbe Morio and many others. - You have not seen yet? or: - you are not familiar with ma tante [my aunt]? - said Anna Pavlovna had guests very seriously misled them to the little old lady in the high bow, swim out from another room as soon began to come visit, and called them by name, slowly moving his eyes from the guest to ma tante [aunt], and then departed. All guests perform the ritual of welcoming an unknown to anyone uninteresting and unnecessary aunt. Anna Pavlovna with a sad, solemn participation followed their greetings, silently approving of them. Ma tante each spoke in the same terms about his health, about their health and the health of her Majesty, which was now, thank God, it is better. All approaches, out of politeness not showing haste, with a sense of ease in the heavy duty pulling back from the old lady, so they'd all night never to approach her. Young Princess Bolkonskaya came to work in the gold-embroidered velvet bag. Her pretty, with a little mustache chernevshimisya upper lip was short in the teeth, but the dearer it is opened and the even lovelier sometimes stretched and fell to the bottom. As is always the case with quite attractive for women, the lack of it - short and lips half-open mouth - it seemed peculiar, actually its beauty. Everyone was fun to look at this, full of health and vitality, pretty expectant mother, so is easy to carry the position. Elderly and bored, gloomy young people who looked at her, it seemed that they are made like her, having stayed and talked for some time with her. Who spoke to her and seen at every word her bright smile and sparkling white teeth, which could be seen constantly, he thought he was now particularly kind. And it is thought each. The little princess, waddling, small quick steps around the table with the workers handbag on her arm and fun adjusting her dress, sat on the sofa, near the silver samovar, as if all she was doing was part de plaisir [entertainment] for her and for all around her. - J'ai apporte mon ouvrage [I took a job], - she said, unfolding her reticule and addressing all together. - Look, Annette, ne me jouez pas un mauvais tour, - she said to the hostess. - Vous m'avez ecrit, que c'etait une toute petite soiree; voyez, comme je suis attifee. [Do not play with me a bad joke; you wrote to me that you have a very small evening. See how I dressed badly. ] And she threw up her hands to show her, in lace, a gray elegant dress, a little below the chest belted wide ribbon. - Soyez tranquille, Lise, vous serez toujours la plus jolie [Be calm, you will all the best], - replied Anna Pavlovna. - Vous savez, mon mari m'abandonne, - she went on in the same tone, referring to the general, - il va se faire tuer. Dites moi, pourquoi cette vilaine guerre, [You know, my husband left me. He goes to his death. Tell me, why this nasty war] - she said Prince Vasili, and without waiting for an answer, turned to Prince Vasili's daughter, to the beautiful Helen. - Quelle delicieuse personne, que cette petite princesse! [What a lovely lady, this little princess! ] - quietly said Prince Vasili to Anna Pavlovna. Shortly after the little princess went massive, stout young man with a cropped head, glasses, light trousers in the fashion, high-frill and brown coat. This stout young man was an illegitimate son of the famous Catherine nobleman, Count Bezukhov, is now dying in Moscow. He never even served, I had just arrived from abroad, where he grew up, and was the first time in the society. Anna Pavlovna greeted him with a bow belonging to the people of the lowest hierarchy in her salon. But in spite of this lower grade of their greeting, at the sight of the logged-Pierre in the face of Anna Pavlovna portray anxiety and fear, similar to that which is expressed at the sight of something too huge and untypical place. While it is true, Pierre was a little more than other men in the room, but this fear can only refer to what clever and with a timid, supervisory and natural look that distinguishes it from everyone in this room. - C'est bien aimable a vous, monsieur Pierre, d'etre venu voir une pauvre malade, [It is very kind of you, Pierre, that you came to visit the poor sick] - he said Anna Pavlovna, exchanging glances fearfully and aunt to she let him down. Pierre proburlil something unintelligible and went to look for something eyes. He happily, cheerfully smiled, bowing to the little princess, like a close friend, and went to my aunt. Fear of Anna Pavlovna was not in vain, because Pierre, without hearing the speech aunt about the health of her Majesty, moved away from her. Anna Pavlovna fright stopped him with the words: - You do not know the Abbe Morio? it is a very interesting man ... - she said. handshake giving Pierre to know that it does not need to ask. He has something to say more, but at this time has risen Prince Vasili and his daughter, and the two young men got up to let them pass. - Excuse me, my dear Viscount, - said Prince Vasili to the Frenchman, gently pulling his sleeve down to a chair, so that he did not get up. - This unfortunate messenger at holiday deprives me of the pleasure and interrupts you. I'm very sad to leave your delightful evening - he said Anna Pavlovna. His daughter, Princess Helene, lightly holding the folds of her dress, went between the chairs and the smile shone even brighter on her beautiful face. Pierre looked almost frightened, enthusiastic eyes on this beauty, as she passed him. - Very well, - said Prince Andrew. - Very, - said Pierre. Passing by, Prince Vasili seized Pierre's hand and said to Anna Pavlovna. - the image of a bear me, - he said. - Here it is a month living with me, and the first time I see him in the light. Nothing is more necessary to the young man as the society of clever women. V Anna Pavlovna smiled and promised to take Pierre, who, she knew, accounted for relatives on his father Prince Vasili. Elderly lady sitting before a ma tante, quickly got up and overtook Prince Vasili in front. On her face was gone, all the former feigned interest. Good, isplakannoe her face expressed only anxiety and fear. - What did you say to me, Prince, of my Boris? - she said, catching him in the hall. (She reproached the name of Boris with a special accent on the o). - I can not stay any longer in Petersburg. Tell me, what news I can bring my poor boy? Despite the fact that Prince Vasili reluctantly and almost rudely listened to the old lady, and even showed impatience, it tenderly and touching and smiling at him, so he did not go away, took his hand. - What you should say a word to the sovereign, and he will be directly transferred to the Guards - she asked. - Believe me, I'll do everything I can, Princess, - answered Prince Vasili, - but I find it difficult to ask the emperor; I would advise you to turn to Rumyantsev through Prince Golitsyn: it would have been smarter. An elderly lady was named Princess Drubetskoy, one of the best families in Russia, but she was poor, long been out of the world, and has lost the old connection. She came now to secure a definition of the Guards for her only son. Only to see Prince Vasili, she called and arrived on the evening of Anna Pavlovna, but then she heard the story of a viscount. She was frightened words of Prince Vasili; once beautiful face expressed her anger, but it only lasted a minute. She smiled again and stronger grabbed the arm of Prince Vasili. - Listen, prince, - she said - I never asked you, would never ask, never reminded you a friend of my father to you. But now, God, I beg you, do it for my son, and I will take you to the benefactor, - she added hastily. - No, you're not angry, but you must promise me. I have asked Golitsyn, he refused. Soyez le bon enfant que vous avez ete, [Be a good fellow, as you were,] - she said, trying to smile, while her eyes were tears. - Dad, we'll be late, - said, turning her beautiful head on the ancient shoulders, Princess Helene, waiting at the door. But the influence in the world there are capital that should be protected, that it has not disappeared. Prince Vasili knew this, and just realizing that if he had begged for anyone who requests it, soon it was impossible to ask for himself, he rarely used his influence. In the case of Princess Drubetskoy he felt, however, after her new appeal, something like remorse. She reminded him of the truth: first steps in his service, he was obliged to her father. In addition, he saw her techniques that she - one of those women, especially mothers, who once took for something in his head, nothing will be restrained until then, until the their wishes, and otherwise prepared for the daily , constantly teasing and even on the scene. This last thought shook him. - Chere Anna M., - he said, with his invariable familiarity and boredom in his voice - for me it is almost impossible to do what you want; but to prove to you how much I love you and honor the memory of the deceased your father, I will do the impossible: your son will be transferred to the Guards, here is my hand. Are you satisfied? - My dear, you are the benefactor! I did not expect otherwise from you; I know how good you are. He wanted to leave. - Wait a minute, two words. Une fois passe aux gardes ... [If he goes to the Guards ...] - She hesitated: - You are good with Ilarionovichem Mikhail Kutuzov, recommend Boris to him adjutant. Then I was at peace, and then it would be too ... Prince Vasili smiled. - That I can not promise. You do not know how Kutuzov is deposited since he was appointed commander in chief. He told me himself that all the Moscow ladies have conspired to give him all their children to aides. - No, I promise I will not let you, my dear, my benefactor ... - Dad! - again in the same tone repeated beauty - we'll be late. - Well, au revoir, [Goodbye] farewell. You see? - So tomorrow you will report to the Emperor? - Sure, but I do not promise to Kutuzov. - No, I promise, promise, Basile, [Vasily] - told him after Anna Mikhaylovna, with a smile the young coquette, which once must have been peculiar to it, and now so did not go to her emaciated face. She seemed to have forgotten his years and floats out of habit, all the old women's funds. But as soon as he came out, her face again took the same cold, feigned an expression that was on it before. She returned to the circle in which the viscount kept talking, and again pretended to listen, waiting for time to go, as the case it was done. - But how do you find all this latest comedy du sacre de Milan? [Milan's anointing? ] - said Anna Pavlovna. Et la nouvelle comedie des peuples de Genes et de Lucques, qui viennent presenter leurs voeux a M. Buonaparte assis sur un trone, et exaucant les voeux des nations! Adorable! Non, mais c'est a en devenir folle! On dirait, que le monde entier a perdu la tete. [And here is the new comedy: people of Genoa and Lucca are willing their desires Mr. Bonaparte. And Mr. Buonaparte sitting on a throne and fulfills the desires of the peoples. 0! This is amazing! No, from this you can go crazy. I think that the whole world has lost his head. ] Prince Andrew smiled, looking straight into the face of Anna Pavlovna. - «Dieu me la donne, gare a qui la touche», - he said (the words of Bonaparte, said at the laying of the crown). - On dit qu'il a ete tres beau en prononcant ces paroles, [God gave me the crown. Trouble to those who touch it. - They say that he was very good, uttering these words] - he added, and again repeated these words in Italian: «Dio mi la dona, guai a chi la tocca». - J'espere enfin, - continued to Anna Pavlovna, - que ca a ete la goutte d'eau qui fera deborder le verre. Les souverains ne peuvent plus supporter cet homme, qui menace tout. [I hope it was, finally, is the drop that overflowed the glass. Sovereigns can no longer tolerate this man who threatens all. ] - Les souverains? Je ne parle pas de la Russie, - said Viscount polite and hopeless: - Les souverains, madame! Qu'ont ils fait pour Louis XVII, pour la reine, pour madame Elisabeth? Rien, - he went on and inspired. - Et croyez-moi, ils subissent la punition pour leur trahison de la cause des Bourbons. Les souverains? Ils envoient des ambassadeurs complimenter l'usurpateur. [Emperors! I'm not talking about Russia. Sirs! But what they have done for Louis XVII, for the Queen to Elizabeth? Nothing. And believe me, they are punished for their betrayal of the cause of the Bourbons. Sirs! They send ambassadors to welcome kidnapper throne. ] And he, contemptuous breath, again changed his position. Prince Hippolyte, long looked through her lorgnette at the Viscount, suddenly at these words turned his whole body to the little princess and asked her for a needle began to show her drawing with a needle on the table, coat Conde. He explains to her the coat of arms with a significant air, as if the princess asked him about it. - Baton de gueules, engrele de gueules d'azur - maison Conde, [The phrase is not translatable literally, as it consists of conventional heraldic terms is not quite accurate use. The general sense is: Conde coat of arms is a shield with red and blue stripes narrow serrated] - he said. Princess, smiling, listening. - If a year Buonaparte remains on the throne of France, - Viscount continued the conversation, like a man does not listen to others, but in fact, the best of his knowledge, only tracking the progress of his thoughts - that things go too far. Intrigue, violence, exile, executions society, I mean the good society, the French will be forever destroyed, and then ... He shrugged and spread his hands. Pierre wanted to say something: the conversation interested him, but Anna Pavlovna, the guard it interrupted. - The Emperor Alexander, - she said, sadly, it is always accompanying the speeches about the imperial family - has announced that it will provide by the French to choose the form of government. And I think there is no doubt that the whole nation, free from the usurper, would rush into the hands of the rightful king, - said Anna Pavlovna, trying to be nice to the emigrant and royalist. - It is doubtful, - said Prince Andrew. - Monsieur le vicomte [Lord Viscount] rightly says that things have gone too far. I think it will be difficult to return to the old. - How long have I heard - I blushing again chimed in Pierre - almost all the nobility have already crossed over to the side of Bonaparte. - It is said Bonapartists, - said the viscount, without looking at Pierre. - Now it is difficult to know the public opinion of France. - Bonaparte l'a dit, [It is said Bonaparte] - Prince Andrew said with a grin. (It was evident that the Viscount he did not like, and that although he did not look at him, against him addressed his speech.) - «Je leur ai montre le chemin de la gloire» - he said after a short silence, again repeating the words Napoleon: - «ils n'en ont pas voulu; je leur ai ouvert mes antichambres, ils se sont precipites en foule »... Je ne sais pas a quel point il a eu le droit de le dire. [I have shown them the way of glory: they did not want; I opened them my front: they rushed to the crowd ... I do not know to what extent he was right to say so. ] - Aucun, [No] - said Viscount. - After the murder of the Duke of even the most partisan people no longer see him as a hero. Si meme ca a ete un heros pour certaines gens, - said the viscount, addressing Anna Pavlovna, - depuis l'assassinat du duc il ya un Marietyr de plus dans le ciel, un heros de moins sur la terre. [If he was a hero to some people, after the murder of the Duke of one martyr became more in heaven and one hero less on earth. ] No sooner had Anna Pavlovna and the others smile evaluate these words the viscount, as Pierre again broke into the conversation, and Anna Pavlovna, although it had a premonition that he would say something indecent, she could not stop him. - The execution of the Duc d'Enghien, - said M. Pierre - was a state necessity; I just see the greatness of soul that Napoleon was not afraid to take on a responsibility in this act. - Dieul mon Dieu! [O God! my God! ] - terrible whisper said Anna Pavlovna. - Comment, M. Pierre, vous trouvez que l'assassinat est grandeur d'ame, [How, Monsieur Pierre, you see the murder of the greatness of the soul] - said the little princess, smiling and moving up to his job. - Ah! Oh! - said different voices. - Capital! [Excellent! ] - in English he said Prince Hippolyte began to beat his hand over his knee. Viscount only shrugged. Pierre looked solemnly over his spectacles at the audience. - because I say so, - he continued to despair - that the Bourbons fled from the Revolution leaving the people of anarchy; and one Napoleon was able to understand the revolution, to win it, so for the common good, he could not stop in front of the life of one person. - Do you want to go to that table? - said Anna Pavlovna. But Pierre did not answer, he continued his speech. - No, - he said, more and more and inspired - Napoleon is great because he was above the Revolution, suppressed its abuses, retaining all the good - and the equality of citizens and the freedom of speech and the press - and only because the purchased power. - Yes, if he took power without using it to kill, would have given her rightful king - Viscount said - then I would have called him a great man. - He could not do it. The people gave him power only then, that he delivered him out of the Bourbons, and because people saw it as a great man. The revolution was a great thing - continued Monsieur Pierre, betraying by this desperate and provocative introductory offer its great youth and the desire to make everything better. - Revolution and regicide a great thing ... after that ... But will not you go to that table? - repeated Anna Pavlovna. - Contrat social, [Social Contract] - with a gentle smile said Viscount. - I'm not talking about a regicide. I'm talking about ideas. - Yes, the idea of ​​robbery, murder, and regicide, - interrupted again ironic voice. - These were the extreme, of course, but they are not the full significance and importance of human rights, emancipation from prejudices, in the equality of citizens; and all these ideas Napoleon retained in their full force. - Freedom and equality, - said contemptuously Viscount like reshivshiysya finally seriously to prove to this young man the foolishness of his speeches - all buzzwords that have long been compromised. Who does not love liberty and equality? Even our Savior preached liberty and equality. Is the revolution people happier? On the contrary. WE WILL wanted freedom, and Bonaparte destroyed it. Prince Andrew with a smile, glancing at Pierre, then Viscount, then on the mistress. In the first minute antics Pierre Anna Pavlovna was terrified, despite his habit to light; but when she saw that despite Pierre uttered blasphemous speech, the viscount did not lose his temper, and when she saw that no longer possible to hush up these speeches, she gathered her forces and joined the Viscount, attacked the speaker. - Mais, mon cher mr Pierre, [But, my dear Pierre,] - said Anna Pavlovna, - how do you explain the great man who could execute the Duke finally, just a man, without a trial and without guilt? - I would ask, - said Viscount - how monsieur explains the 18th Brumaire. Is not that cheating? C'est un escamotage, qui ne ressemble nullement a la maniere d'agir d'un grand homme. [This is cheating, do not like the image of the great man of action. ] - And the prisoners in Africa, where he killed? - said the little princess. - This is terrible! - And she shrugged. - C'est un roturier, vous aurez beau dire, [That rascal, no matter what you say,] - Prince Hippolyte said. Monsieur Pierre did not know whom to answer, looked round at everyone and smiled. His smile was not so, what other people, merging with neulybkoy. He, on the contrary, when she came up smiling, then suddenly disappeared instantly, and even more serious sullen face and is a friend - baby, good, even somewhat stupid and as if asking forgiveness. Viscount, who saw it for the first time, it became clear that this Jacobin was not so terrible as his words. All were silent. - How do you want him to answer all of a sudden? - said Prince Andrew. - While it is necessary to distinguish between the actions of the state of human acts of private persons, the commander or the Emperor. It seems so to me. - Yes, yes, of course - I picked up Pierre, delighted serving him help. - It is impossible not to admit - continued Prince Andrew - Napoleon as a man is great on Arcole bridge, in the hospital at Jaffa where he gives her hand to the plague, but ... there are other things that it is difficult to justify. Prince Andrew, apparently desiring to mitigate the awkwardness of speech Pierre sat up, SBIR go and giving the sign of his wife. Suddenly Prince Hippolyte stood up and hand signs of stopping and asking him to sit down, spoke: - Ah! aujourd'hui on m'a raconte une anecdote moscovite, charmante: il faut que je vous en regale. Vous m'excusez, vicomte, il faut que je raconte en russe. Autrement on ne sentira pas le sel de l'histoire. [Today I told a charming Moscow anecdote; it is necessary to have them popodchivat. Sorry, Viscount, I will talk in Russian, otherwise lost the whole point of the anecdote. ] And Prince Hippolyte began to speak in Russian accent so, what the French say, shot from the year in Russia. All were suspended: so lively, it is strongly demanded that the prince Hippolyte attention to its history. - In Moscou there is one lady, une dame. And it is very stingy. She had to have two valets de pied [valet] for a coach. And a very large growth. It was her taste. And she had une femme de chambre [maid], even higher. She said ... Here Prince Hippolyte thought seems hardly wondering. - She said ... yes, she said, "the girl (a la femme de chambre), put on livree [livery] and come with me, for a coach, faire des visites». [Makes a visit. ] Here Prince Ippolit snorted and laughed a lot before his audience, which produced an unfavorable impression of the narrator. However, many, including elderly lady and Anna Pavlovna, smiled. - She's gone. Nezapno made a strong wind. The girl lost her hat and long hair comb ... Then he could no longer hold on and became more jerky laugh and through laughter said: - And the whole world has learned ... That anecdote ended. Although it was not clear to him what he says and what he had to tell all means in Russian, but Anna Pavlovna and the others appreciated Prince Hippolyte secular courtesy, so nice to finish the nasty and unkind trick of Monsieur Pierre. Talking after the joke was scattered into small, small talk about the future and the last ball, the play, how, when, and where someone would see. VI Having thanked Anna Pavlovna for her charmante soiree, [a charming evening,] the guests began to disperse. Pierre was clumsy. Thick, above the ordinary height, wide, with huge red hands, he said, could not enter the salon and even less able to get out of it, that is, before going to say something particularly agreeable. In addition, he was distracted. ] - he said Prince Andrew got up and politely, like a stranger, kissing her hand. VIII Friends silent. Neither one nor the other did not start talking. Pierre looked at Prince Andrew, Prince Andrew rubbed his forehead with his little hand. - Let's go to dinner - he said with a sigh, getting up and heading for the door. They entered the elegant, newly richly paneled dining room. Everything from napkins to the silver, porcelain and crystal, bore the imprint of the special novelty, which happens in the economy young couple. In the middle of supper Prince Andrew she leaned over and, as a man, for a long time has something on the heart and suddenly decide to speak, an expression of nerve stimulation, in which Pierre had never seen his friend, began to speak: - Never, never marry, my friend ; Here's my advice: do not marry as long as you do not tell yourself that you have done everything I could, and as long as you do not stop loving the woman what you choose, as long as you can not see it clearly; and then you make a mistake cruel and irreparable. Marry an old man, anywhere unfit ... And then all will be lost, that you have a good and high. Everything to spend on the little things. Yes Yes Yes! Do not look at me with surprise. If you expect from yourself of something ahead, at every step you will feel that you all over, everything is closed, except for the living room, where you will stand on a board with a court lackey and an idiot ... But that! ... He energetically waved hand. Pierre took off his glasses, which made his face changed, even showing kindness, and looked at each other in surprise. - My wife, - continued Prince Andrew - a beautiful woman. This is one of those rare women with whom you can be late for his honor; but, my God, what I would not give now to be married! This is one I'll speak first, and because I love you. Prince Andrew, saying it was even less similar than before, in order to Bolkonsky, who sat lounging in chairs Anna Pavlovna and through clenched teeth, squinting, said French phrases. His dry face all trembling nervously recovery of each muscle; eyes that seemed to be extinguished before the fire of life, and now shone radiant, bright luster. It was evident that the lifeless he seemed at ordinary times, so it was more vigorous in those moments almost painful irritation. - You do not understand why I say this, - he continued. - It's a story of life. You say, Bonaparte and his career - he said, although Pierre and did not speak about Bonaparte. - You talk of Bonaparte; but Bonaparte when he worked went step by step toward the goal, he was free, he had nothing but his goal - and he achieved it. But bind himself with a woman - and how constrained convict, you lose all freedom. And everything that is in you hope and strength, everything is just a burden and remorse torments you. Living rooms, gossip, balls, vanity, nothingness - that's a vicious circle from which I can not get out. I am now going to the war, in the greatest war, which can only happen, but I do not know and do not fit. Je suis tres aimable et tres caustique, [I am very sweet and very eater] - continued Prince Andrew - and Pavlova listen to me. And this stupid society, without which it can not live my wife, and these women ... If only you could know what it is toutes les femmes distinguees [all these women of good society] and even women! My father's rights. Selfishness, vanity, stupidity, pettiness in all - that women, when shown things as they are. Look at them in the light, it seems that there is something and nothing, nothing, nothing! Yes, do not marry, my dear, do not marry - finished Prince Andrew. - I find it funny - said Pierre - what are you, you think you are unable to, his life - depraved life. You have everything, everything in front. And you ... He did not say that you are, but his tone showed how highly he is a friend and how much is waiting for him in the future. "How can he say that!" Thought Pierre. Pierre saw Prince Andrew example of all perfection precisely because Prince Andrew eminently connects all the qualities that were not at Pierre, and are the closest possible to express the concept of - willpower. Pierre always marveled at the ability of Prince Andrew's calm handling of all kinds of people, his extraordinary memory, extensive reading (he read everything, knew everything, everything had a concept) and most of all his ability to work and learn. If Pierre is often amazed at the lack of visionary abilities AndrewFoot philosophizing (what was particularly inclined to Pierre), and in this he saw no flaw and strength. In the best, most friendly and simple relations flattery or praise is necessary as of bedding is necessary for the wheels, that they drove. - Je suis un homme fini, [I have done for the man,] - Prince Andrew said. - What can I say about me? Let's talk about you - he said, after a pause and a smile to their comforting thought. That smile at that moment reflected in Pierre's face. - And what to say about me? - Pierre said, dismissing his mouth in a carefree, cheerful smile. - What am I? Je suis un batard [I'm the illegitimate son! ] - And he suddenly flushed crimson. It was evident that he had made a great effort to say it. - Sans nom, sans fortune ... [No name, no state ...] And then, right ... - But he did not say that right. - I Liberty yet and I feel good. I just did not know what to start. I wanted to ask your advice seriously. Prince Andrew kind eyes looking at him. But in his eyes, friendly, gentle, still expressed the consciousness of his own superiority. - You are dear to me, especially because you are the one live man among our whole world. You feel good. Choose what you want; it does not matter. You'll be good everywhere, but one thing: stop you go to these Kuragin, lead this life. So it does not come to you, all these sprees and gusarstvo and everything ... - Que voulez-vous, mon cher, - said Pierre, shrugging his shoulders, - les femmes, mon cher, les femmes! [What do you want, my dear woman, my dear woman! ] - I do not understand - replied Andrew. - Les femmes comme il faut, [Respectable women] is another matter; but Kuragin les femmes, les femmes et le vin, [Kuragin women, women and wine] do not understand! Pierre lived y Prince Vasily Kuragin and participated in the dissolute life of his son Anatole, the very thing which to correct going to marry Prince Andrew's sister. - You know, - said Pierre, as if he suddenly came a happy thought - seriously, I have long thought. With etoyu life nothing I can neither solve nor think. A headache, there is no money. Today he called me, I will not go. - Give me your word that you will not go? - Honestly! IX was already the second hour of the night, when Pierre came From his friend. The night was the June, St. Petersburg, bessumrachnaya night. Pierre got into a hired carriage with the intention of going home. But the closer he approached, the more he felt the inability to sleep that night, more like in the evening or in the morning. Far to be seen through the empty streets. Dear Pierre remembered that Anatole Kuragin tonight was to meet the ordinary gaming company, after which usually was the booze, ends one of the favorite amusements Pierre. "It would be nice to go to Kuragin," he thought. But he immediately remembered this Prince Andrew honestly not going to see Kuragin. But immediately, as is the case with humans, called spineless, he so longed to once again experience that he knew so dissolute life, he decided to go. And immediately he got the idea that this word does not mean anything, because even before Prince Andrew, he also gave to Prince Anatole word be with him; Finally, he thought that all these honest words - such contingent things, that have no definite meaning, especially if the figure that may be tomorrow, or it will die or will happen to him something so extraordinary that it will not have any honest or dishonest. This kind of reasoning, destroying all his decisions and assumptions, often came to Pierre. He went to Kuragin. When he reached the porch of the big house at the horse-guards barracks in which he lived Anatole, he rose to the lighted porch, on the stairs, and entered the open door. In front there was no one; littered with empty bottles, raincoats, galoshes; smelled of wine, I hear the distant voices and scream. The game and the dinner is over, but the guests have not yet slithered. Pierre took off his cloak and entered the first room, where the remains of dinner and a waiter stood, thinking that no one sees, was drinking on the sly unfinished glasses. From the third room could be heard scuffling, laughing, shouting of familiar voices and the roar of a bear. About eight young men were crowding anxiously near the open window. Three were busy with a young bear, one of which dragged on a chain, startling them both. - Hold on to Stevens hundred! - shouted one. - Look no support! - I cried the other. - I'm for Dolohov! - shouted a third. - Miscellaneous, Kuragin. - Well, come on Mishka, then bet. - One spirit, or lost, - shouted a fourth. - Jacob, let the bottle, Jacob! - shouted the owner, a tall handsome man, standing in the middle of the crowd in a thin shirt, open at the middle of the chest. - Hold on, gentlemen. Here he Petrushka, my dear friend - he turned to Pierre. Another voice short man with clear blue eyes, particularly striking among these all the drunken voices his sober expression, he shouted from the window: "Come here - razoymi bet!" This was Dolokhov, Semyonov officer, a notorious gambler and bretor, who lived together with Anatole. Pierre smiled, fun looking around. - I do not understand. What's the matter? - Wait, he was not drunk. Give me the bottle, - said Anatole, taking a glass from the table, went up to Pierre. - First of all drink. Pierre began to drink glass after glass, looking askance drunken guests who gathered at the window again, and listening to them talk. Anatole was pouring him wine and told that Dolokhov bets with the Englishman Stevens, a sailor, a former here, that he Dolokhov, drink a bottle of rum sitting on the third-floor window with his legs bowed outward. - Well, drink all the same! - said Anatole, giving Pierre the last glass - and it will not let you! - No, I do not want, - said Pierre, pushing Anatole, and went to the window. Dolokhov was holding the Englishman's hand and clearly, distinctly pronouncing terms of the bet, addressing mainly to Anatole and Pierre. Dolokhov was a man of medium height, with curly and blond, blue eyes. He was twenty-five years. He was not wearing a mustache, like all infantry officers, and his mouth, the most striking feature of his face was all visible. this mouth-lines were remarkably thinly curved. In the middle of the upper lip vigorously fell to a solid bottom sharp wedge, and was formed in the corners is constantly something like two smiles, one on each side; and all together, especially in conjunction with the firm, arrogant, intelligent eyes, was so impressed that it was impossible not to notice that person. Dolokhov was a rich man without any ties. And despite the fact that tens of thousands of Anatole lived, Dolokhov lived with him and had put himself in such a way that Anatole and all who knew them respected Dolohov more than Anatole. Dolokhov play all games and nearly always won. However much he drank, he never lost his head clear. And Kuragin and Dolokhov were at that time in the world of celebrity rakes and carousing Petersburg. a bottle of rum was brought; frame, were not allowed to sit on the outer slope of the window, broke out two footmen, probably in a hurry and robevshie of tips and screams surrounding lords. Anatole with his triumphant kind went to the window. He wanted to smash something. He pushed and pulled lackeys frame, but the frame did not give up. He broke the glass. - Come on you mighty man - he turned to Pierre. Pierre took over the bar, and pulled with a bang vyvorotip oak frame. - All out, and they'll think that I hold, - said Dolokhov. - Englishman bragging ... and ... well ... -? Said Anatole. - Well, - said Pierre, looking at Dolokhov, who, picking up a bottle of rum to the window from which could see the light of heaven and poured on it morning and evening twilight. Dolokhov with a bottle of rum in his hand jumped out the window. "Listen!" He shouted, standing on the windowsill and turning the room. All were silent. - I bet (he spoke French, so he knew the Englishman, and have not spoken too well in that language). I bet fifty imperials want a hundred? - he added, turning to the Englishman. - No, fifty, - said the Englishman. - Well, at the fifty imperials - I'll drink a bottle of rum all, without taking away from your mouth, drink, sitting at the window, here on this spot (he bent down and showed sloping outside walls of the protrusion) and holding for anything ... So? ... - Very well, - said the Englishman. Anatole turned to the Englishman and taking him by the button of his coat and looking at it from the top (the Englishman was short), launched in English to repeat it terms of the bet. - Wait a minute! - Dolokhov shouted, knocking a bottle on the window to attract attention. - Wait, Kuragin; Listen. If someone does the same, then I pay a hundred imperials. You see? The Englishman nodded, giving no understand whether he intended to or not to accept this new bet. Anatole did not release the Englishman and, despite the fact that he, nodding, gave to know that he understood everything, Anatole translated his words Dolokhov in English. Young skinny boy, the Life Hussars, losing that evening, climbed up to the window, leaned out and looked down. -! I ... I ... I ... - he said, looking out the window on a stone pavement. - Attention! - I cried Dolokhov and pulled off an officer of the window, which is entangled spurs awkwardly leaped into the room. Putting the bottle on the window sill, it was convenient to get it, Dolokhov carefully and quietly climbed out of the window. Dangling legs and both arms in rasperevshis edge of the box, it is an example, he sat down, dropped his hands, moved to the right, left, and took out a bottle. Anatole brought two candles and placed them on the window sill, though it was already quite light. Spina Dolokhov in a white shirt, and his curly head were lighted on both sides. All crowded around the windows. The Englishman was ahead. Pierre smiled and said nothing. One of those present, the other older, with a frightened and angry face, suddenly moved forward and wanted to grab Dolokhov's shirt. - Gentlemen, this is folly; He will kill to death - a more prudent person said. Anatole stopped him: - Do not touch, do you scare him, he will kill. Eh? ... What then? ... Huh? ... Dolohov turned, and again recovering rasperevshis hands. - If who to me is still off limits - he said, rarely missing words through clenched and thin lips - that I'll be right down in here. Well! ... Saying "well" !, he turned back, dropped his hands, picked up the bottle and raised it to his mouth, threw back his head and threw up his free hand to advantage. One of the footmen, who had begun to pick up the glass, stood in a bent position, not taking his eyes from the window and back Dolokhov. Anatole stood erect, his eyes opened wide. The Englishman, thrusting forward his lips, watched from the side. One that stopped, ran into the corner of the room and lay down on the sofa, facing the wall. Pierre hid his face, and a faint smile, forgetting himself, remained on his face, even though it is now expressed horror and fear. All were silent. Pierre took it from the hands of the eye: Dolokhov sat still in the same position, only his head was bent back so that the neck curly hair touched his shirt collar, and the hand with a bottle of rose higher and higher, shuddering and making an effort. Apparently emptied a bottle and, together with the rising, bending his head. "What does it take so long?" Thought Pierre. It seemed to him that it took more than half an hour. Suddenly Dolokhov made a backward movement of his back, and his hand trembled nervously; This tremor was enough to move the whole body, sitting on a gentle slope. He moved all over, and even more rattled, making an effort, hand and his head. One hand went to grab hold of the window sill, but fell again. Pierre closed his eyes again and said to myself that I do not ever open them. Suddenly he felt a stir all around. He looked up: Dolokhov was standing on the windowsill, his face was pale and fun. - empty! He threw the bottle to the Englishman, who caught it. Dolokhov jumped from the window. From it smelt strongly of rum. - Well! Well done! That's a bet! The devil take you all! - shouted from all sides. The Englishman took out the purse, counted out the money. Dolokhov was frowning and silent. Pierre jumped out the window. Lord! Who wants to bet with me? I'll do the same - suddenly he shouted. - And the bet is not necessary, that's what. Were give a bottle. I'll give ... led. - Let, let them! - Dolohov said, smiling. - What are you? crazy? Who let you? You and stairs dizzy - talking from different sides. - I'll drink, give a bottle of rum! - cried Pierre, determined and drunken gesture, struck the table, and climbed out the window. He was caught by the hand; but he was so strong that it pushed away the one who approached him. - No, it do not sell on for anything, - said Anatoly, - wait a minute, I did cheat. Look, I'm with you I'll wager, but tomorrow, and now we're all going to ***. - Let's go, - cried Pierre - we go ... And bear with a take ... And he grabbed the bear and hugging and lifting him, circled the room with him!. X Prince Vasili fulfilled the promise made to the party at the Duchess Anna Pavlovna Drubetskoy, ask him for his only son, Boris. About it was reported to the Emperor, and, unlike the others, he was transferred to the Guards Semenov regiment as ensign. But the aide, or composed at Kutuzov Boris has not been appointed, despite all the efforts and intrigues of Anna Mikhaylovna. Shortly after the evening of Anna Pavlovna Anna Mikhaylovna he returned to Moscow, straight to her rich relatives Rostovs, with whom she was in Moscow and whose childhood was brought up, and for years had lived her adorable Borenka just produced in the army, and immediately translated into the Guard ensigns. The Guards had already left the St. Petersburg of the 10th of August, and the son, for the remainder of uniforms in Moscow, had to catch up with her on the road to Radzivilov. At Rostov was the birthday of Natalia, mother and minor daughter. In the morning, still, arriving and leaving trains, driving congratulator to a large, well-known all over Moscow home of Countess Rostova on Cook. Countess with a beautiful eldest daughter and guests, did not cease to change each other, we sat in the living room. The countess was a woman with an oriental type of thin face, forty-five, obviously exhausted children, whom it was twelve. The slowness of her movements and said to originate from the weakness of the forces, gave her a significant look, inspires respect. Princess Anne M. Drubetskaya as home man sitting right there, helping in case of taking and borrowing talk guests. The youth was in the back rooms, not finding it necessary to participate in the reception of visits. Graf met and accompanied guests, inviting everyone to dinner. "Very, very grateful to you, ma chere or mon cher [my dear and my dear] (ma shere or mon cher, he told everyone, without exception, without the slightest shades, both above and below it stood the people) for himself and his dear birthday girl . See also, come to dinner. You offend me, mon cher. Sincerely I ask you with all my family, ma chere ». These words have the same expression on his full of fun, and clean-shaven face, and with an equally-strong handshake and repeatable short bows he said to all, without exception, and change. After seeing one guest, the Count returned to one or the one that had been in the living room; pridvinuv chair with the air of one who loves and knows how to live, valiantly with his legs apart and putting your hands on the knee, it is much swayed, offered to guess about the weather, consulted on health, sometimes in Russian, sometimes in very bad but self-confident French, and again overlooking tired, but firm in the performance of duties of man came to see off, straightening his sparse gray hair on his bald head, and again called to dinner. Sometimes, returning from the front, he went through the flower and ofitsiantskuyu in a large marble hall where put on the table at the eighty-Kuvert, and looking at the waiters, who wore silver and porcelain, arrange tables and deploy damask tablecloths, beckoned to him, Dmitry Vasilyevich, a nobleman, engage in all his affairs, and said: "well, well, Dmitri, see that all was well. Well, well, - he said, looking around the huge pleasure to push the table. - The main thing - serving. That's right ... "And he walked away, complacently sighing back into the living room. - Mary L. Karagin with her daughter! - bass, reported a huge Countess's footman, entering the living room door. Countess thought and smelt of a gold snuff-box with a portrait of her husband. - tortured me these visits, - she said. - Well, it's her last take. Very it prudish. Ask, - she said to the footman in a sad voice, as though to say, "Well, I do seek!" A tall, plump, with a haughty air chubby lady with smiling daughter, rustling dresses, entered the living room. «Chere comtesse, il ya si longtemps ... elle a ete alitee la pauvre enfant ... au bal des Razoumowsky ... et la comtesse Apraksine ... j'ai ete si heureuse ...» [Dear Countess, how long ago ... she had to lie in bed, poor child ... at the ball at the Razumovsky ... and Countess Apraksin ... was so happy ...] heard a lively female voices, interrupting one another and mingling with the noise of dresses and chairs Moving the update. It began the conversation that instigate just enough to get up at the first pause, to noise dresses, say: «Je suis bien charmee; la sante de maman ... et la comtesse Apraksine »[I am delighted; mother's health ... and Countess Apraksin] and, again, a rustle of dresses, go into the hall, put on a fur coat or a coat and leave. The conversation turned on the city's main news at the time - about the disease known rich and handsome Catherine's time the old Count Bezukhov and his illegal son Pierre, who so behaved indecently on the evening of Anna Pavlovna Scherer. - I am very sorry for the poor count, - said the visitor - and his health is so bad, and now it's the chagrin of his son, it would kill him! - What? - said the countess. - I asked the countess. What to do? Though my daughter, and I will tell the truth, the singer will, Salomon another. We took her to learn Italian. - Is not it too early? They say bad for voice study at this time. - Oh, no, how early! - Earl said. - How did our mothers went to twelve or thirteen years of marriage? - Oh, and now she is in love with Boris! What? - said the countess, softly smiling, looking at Boris's mother, and apparently in response to the idea, it always occupies continued. - Well, you see, I keep it strictly forbid I told her ... God knows what they would do on the sly (Countess went without saying they would be kissing), but now I know every word. She will come running at night and tell me everything. Maybe I pet her; but, really, it seems to be better. I am the eldest kept strictly. - Yes, I was brought up very differently, - said the eldest, beautiful Countess Vera, smiling. But the smile never graced the faces of the Faith, as is usually the case; on the contrary, her face was unnatural and therefore unpleasant. The eldest, Vera, was good, was not stupid, she studied well, was well brought up, her voice was pleasant, what she said was true and appropriate; but, strange to say, everything and the guests and the countess looked at her as if surprised, why she said it, and felt uncomfortable. - Always with older children wisely, want to do something unusual, - said the guest. - It is no secret, ma chere! Wise Countess Vera, - Earl said. - Well, well! still nice out, - he added, winking approvingly Faith. The guests got up and left, promising to come for dinner. - What a way! Already we are sitting, sit! - said the countess, spending guests. XIII When Natasha left the room and ran, it ran only to the flower. In this room, she paused, listening to the chatter of the living room, waiting for release of Boris. She was beginning to get impatient and, stamping his foot, sbiralsya was crying because he was not now, when hearing the not quiet, not quick, decent steps a young man. Natasha quickly rushed between the tubs of flowers and hidden. Boris paused in the middle of the room, looked around, brushed his hand speck from the sleeve of his uniform and went to the mirror, looking at her beautiful face. Natasha, pritihnuv, peeping out of their ambush, waiting to see what he would do. He stood for some time in front of the mirror, smiled and walked to the exit door. Natasha wanted to call out to him, but then changed her mind. "Let looking for," she told herself. Boris has just come out, both from the other door out Sonia flushed through tears something maliciously whispering. Natasha kept from its first movement to rush out to her and remained in their ambush, like a cap of darkness, looking for what was going on in the world. She felt a special new delight. Sonia whispered something and looked back at the door of the living room. Nicholas walked out of the door. - Sonia! What's the matter? Can this be? - Nicholas said, running up to her. - Nothing, nothing, leave me! - Sonya sobbed. - No, I know that. - Well, you know, and beautiful, and you go to her. - UNSD! One word! Whether it is possible so to torment me and yourself for fantasy? - said Nicholas, taking her hand. Sonia did not tore his hands and stopped crying. Natasha, motionless and not breathing, shiny heads looked out of his ambush. "What will happen now"? she thought. - Sonia! I do not need the whole world! You're the one for me all, - said Nikolai. - I'll prove it to you. - I do not like when you say so. - Well, I will not, well, forgive me, Sonya! - He pulled her to him and kissed her. "Oh, how nice!" Thought Natasha, and when Sonya and Nicholas left the room, she followed them and called Boris to her. - Boris, come here, - she said with a sly and significant views. - I need to tell you one thing. Here, here, - she said, and led him into the flower on the place between the tubs where she was hidden. Boris, smiling, followed her. - What is this one thing? - he asked. She was confused, looked around him and saw thrown in the tub her doll, she picked it up. - Kiss the doll, - she said. Boris considerate, gentle eyes looked at her animated face, and answered nothing. - You do not want? Well, come here, - she said, and went deeper into the flowers and threw the doll. - Closer, closer! - she whispered. She caught the officer's hands cuffs and flushed her face could be seen solemnity and fear. - And I want to kiss? - she whispered almost inaudibly, looking askance at him, smiling, and almost crying with excitement. Boris blushed. - What you're funny! - he said, bending down to her, blushing even more, but without doing anything and waiting. She suddenly jumped up on the tub, so that was the above it, embraced it with both hands, so thin bare pen bent over his neck and throwing movement of the head hair back and kissed him on the lips. She slipped between the pots of flowers on the other side and head down, stopped. - Natasha, - he said, - you know that I love you, but ... - Are you in love with me? - Natasha interrupted him. - Yes, in love, but please do not do that now ... Four more years ... Then I will ask for your hand. Natasha thought. - Thirteen, fourteen, fifteen, sixteen ... - she said, except for a thin fingers. - Good! So it's over? And a smile of joy and calm lighted up her animated face. - It's over! - said Boris. - Forever and ever? - said the girl. - To the death? And he took him by the arm, she quietly with a happy face went with him into the sitting room. XIV countess was so tired from the visits that are not instructed to take anyone else, and the porter was told to just call certainly eat all those who will still come with congratulations. Countess-like with eye-to-eye talk with a friend of her childhood, Princess Anna Mikhaylovna, whom she had not seen well with her arrival from St. Petersburg. Anna Mikhaylovna, with its isplakannym and pleasant face, moved closer to the seat of the Countess. - With you I'll be quite frank, - said Anna Mikhaylovna. - quite a few of us left, old friends! From this I still cherish thy friendship. Anna Mikhaylovna looked at Vera and paused. The Countess shook hands with his friend. - Faith - said the countess, turning to the eldest daughter, obviously unloved. - How do you no matter what the concept is not? Do not you feel you're not wanted here? Go to the sisters, or ... handsome Vera smiled contemptuously, apparently without feeling the slightest insult. - If you had told me long ago, mother, I would have immediately gone, - she said, and went to her room. But he passed the sitting room, she noticed that her two symmetrical windows were two couples. She stopped and smiled scornfully. Sonya was sitting close to Nicholas who was copying her poems, the first time he had composed. Boris and Natasha were sitting at another window and fell silent when Vera entered. Sonya and Natasha guilty and happy faces looked at Vera. Fun and touching to look at those girls in love, but the sight of them, obviously, did not stir up a pleasant feeling in Vera. - How many times have I asked you, - she said - do not take my things, you have your own bathroom. She took the inkwell from Nicholas. - Now, now, - he said, mokaya pen. - You all know how to do the wrong time, - said Vera. - That came running into the living room, so that all ashamed to do it for you. Although, or precisely because what she said was completely true, no it did not answer, and all four of them only looked at one another. She lingered in the room with the inkstand in her hand. - And what could be your year secrets between Natasha and Boris, and among you - still one of stupidity! - Well, what you for the business, Vera? - tihenkim voice, intercessory said Natasha. She apparently was all more than ever, in this day of good and affectionate. - Very silly - said Vera - I am ashamed for you. What kind of secrets? ... - Everyone has their own secrets. We'll not touch with Berg, - Natasha said getting heated. - I think, do not touch, - said Vera, - because my actions never anything can be bad. But mama, I tell you with Boris Bypass. - Natalia Ilinishna very well with me costs, - said Boris. - I can not complain - he said. - Leave, Boris, you are such a diplomat (diplomatbylo word much in vogue among children in the special importance which they attach to this word); even boring, - said Natasha, insulted, in a trembling voice. - For what it is bothering me? You'll never understand, - she said, referring to the faith - because you never loved; heart you do not, you're only madame de Genlis [Madame Genlis] (this nickname, which was considered very offensive was given by Nicholas Faith), and your first enjoy - do other troubles. You flirt with Berg as you want, - she said quickly. - Yeah, I'm right in front of guests to run after the young man ... - Well, has achieved its goal - intervened Nicholas - all talked a trouble, upset everyone. Let's go to the nursery. All four of them as to startle a flock of birds rose up and went out of the room. - I have told of trouble, and I'm nothing to anyone - says Vera. - Madame de Genlis! Madame de Genlis! - talked laughing voices from behind the door. Beautiful Vera, producing all such irritating and unpleasant effect, smiled and did not seem affected by the fact that it was said, went to the mirror and smoothed her hair and scarf. Looking at her beautiful face, she became, apparently, still colder and calmer. the conversation went in the living room. - Ah! chere, - said the countess, - and in my life, tout n'est pas rose. Did not I see that du train, que nous allons, [not all roses. - at our way of life,] our state, we do not for a long time! And all this club and his kindness. In the village we live, unless we have a rest? Theaters, hunting and God knows what. But what to say about me! Well, how do you do it all arranged? I often wonder at you, by Annette, how are you, in your years, you ride in a cart alone, in Moscow, St. Petersburg, all the ministers, to the whole of the nobility, all know how to do, I am surprised! Well, how does it work? So I do not know how any of this. - Oh, my soul! - answered the princess Anna Mikhaylovna. - God forbid you know how hard it is to remain a widow without helpers and with the son you love to distraction. Learn everything, - she went on with a certain pride. - The process of mine taught me. If I need to see any of these bigwigs, I write a note: «princesse une telle [Princess so and so] wishes to see such and such" and the food itself is in a cab at least two, at least three times, at least four, until, yet not achieve what I want. I do not care, whatever one may think about me. - Well, what about the one you asked for Borenka? - I asked the countess. - It's your already Guard officer, and little Nicholas is a cadet. No one to intercede. You asked who? - Prince Basil. He was very nice. Now all agreed, reported to the emperor, - said Princess Anna Mikhaylovna enthusiastically, quite forgetting all the humiliation, through which it has passed in order to achieve their goal. - What is he older, Prince Vasili? - I asked the countess. - I have not seen him since our theaters Rumyantsev. And I think, forget about me. Il me faisait la cour, [He dragged me] - Countess remembered with a smile. - All the same, - answered Anna M. - kind crumbles. Les grandeurs ne lui ont pas touriene la tete du tout. [High position not gone to his head at all. ] "I regret that too little can you do, my dear princess, - he tells me - ordering". No, he's a fine man and a fine home. But you know, Nathalieie, my love for my son. I do not know what I would not do for his happiness. And my circumstances before the bad, - continued Anna Mikhaylovna, sadly, and lowering his voice, - before the bad, I'm now in the terrible position. My poor process eats up all that I have and not getting on. I do not, can you imagine, a la lettre [literally] is not a dime of money, and I do not know what to equip Boris. - She took out a handkerchief and began to cry. - I need five hundred rubles, and I have one dvadtsatipyatirublevaya paper. I'm in this position ... One of my hope now to Count Cyril Vladimirovich Bezukhov. If he does not want to support his godson - he baptized Boria - and assign him something for the maintenance, all my troubles will be gone: I do not have anything to equip it. Countess into tears and silently pondered something. - I often think, maybe it's a sin, - said the princess - and often think that's Count Cyril Vladimirovich Bezukhov lives alone ... it's a huge fortune ... and what lives? His life is a burden, and Bors only begin to live. - He must leave something to Boris, - said the countess. - God knows, chere amie! [Dear friend! ] These and rich nobles such selfish. But I still go to him now with Boris and frankly, what's the matter. Let me think they want me, right, anyway, when the fate of the son depends on it. - The princess rose. - Now, two hours and four hours, you dine. I have time to go. And with the methods of the St. Petersburg business lady, who knows how to use the time, Anna Mikhaylovna sent for his son and together went into the hall with him. - Goodbye, my dear, - she said the countess, who accompanied her to the door, - wish me success, - she added in a whisper from her son. - You to Count Kirill Vladimirovich, ma chere? - said the count from the dining room, leaving the same in the front. - Coley him better, call me Pierre to dine. After all, I have it visited, the children danced. Call all means, ma chere. Well, let's see how difference that now Taras. He says that Count Orlov had happened this afternoon, which we will. XV - Mon cher Boris, [Dear Boris] - said Princess Anna Mikhaylovna's son as Countess Rostova's carriage in which they sat, drove down the street strewn with straw and pulled into the wide courtyard of Count Cyril Vladimirovich Bezukhov. - Mon cher Boris, - said the mother, vyprastyvaya hand out from under the old Salop and timid and gentle motion of putting it on the hand of his son - be gentle, be attentive. Count Kirill still your godfather, and it determines your future destiny. Remember that, mon cher, be nice, you know how to be ... - If I knew what would come of anything except humiliation ... - he answered coldly. - But I promised you and I do it for you. Despite the fact that someone's carriage standing at the entrance, the doorman, looking around the mother and son (who is not ordering the report itself, directly entered the glass vestibule between two rows of statues in niches), greatly looking at an old cloak, asked whom they liked princesses or the count, and to learn that the Count, said that their excellency now worse and Grace no one take. - We can go, - said the son in French. - Mon ami! [My friend! ] - the mother said in a pleading voice again dotrogivayas to his son's hand, as if it could touch and thou or excite it. Boris paused and, without taking off his overcoat, looked questioningly at her mother. - Darling - a gentle voice said Anna Mikhaylovna, addressing the porter, - I know that Count Kirill Vladimirovich is very ill ... I then came ... I have a relative ... I will not bother, darling ... And I would just have to see Prince Vasili Sergeevich: because he is worth it. Report back, please. Porter sullenly pulled snurok up and turned away. - Princess Drubetskaya to Prince Vladimirov, - he called escape from above and from beneath ledge ladder peeps waiter in stockings, shoes and tails. Mother smoothed the folds of her dyed silk dress, looked in the whole Venetian mirror in the wall and cheerfully in his worn-out shoes went up the stairs carpet. - Mon cher, voue m'avez promis, [My friend, you promised me] - she turned again to the Son, the touch of his hands arousing him. Son, his eyes downcast, quietly followed her. They went into the hall, from which one door led into the quarters reserved Prince Vasili. While mother and son came out to the middle of the room, set out to ask for directions from leapt at their old waiter input from one of the doors turned the bronze handle and Prince Vasili in a velvet coat, with the sole star, home, left, watching the beautiful black-haired man. This man was well-known Petersburg doctor Lorrain. - C'est donc positif? [So, is this true? ] - said the prince. - Mon prince, «errare humanum est», mais ... [Prince, the man mistaken characteristic. ] - answered the doctor, grassiruya and pronouncing the Latin words a French accent. - C'est bien, c'est bien ... [Okay, okay ...] Seeing Anna Mikhaylovna and her son, Prince Vasili dismissed the doctor and bowed in silence, but with a question View, approached them. Son noticed, when deep sorrow expressed in his mother's eyes, and smiled slightly. - Yes, in what sad circumstances we had to see the prince ... Well, our dear patient? - she said, as if oblivious to the cold, offensive, conquering her sight. Prince Vasili questioningly, to bewilderment, looked at her, then at Boris. Boris bowed politely. Prince Vasili, not responding to the bow turned to Anna Mikhaylovna and her question answered, movement of the head and mouth, which meant the worst hope for the patient. - Really? - cried Anna Mikhaylovna. - Oh, this is terrible! Scary to think ... This is my son - she added, indicating Boris. - He wanted to thank you. Boris bowed again. - Believe me, Prince, that the mother's heart will never forget what you did for us. - I'm glad you could make a pleasant, my dear Anna M., - said Prince Vasili, straightening frill and gesture and voice showing here, in Moscow, in front protected by Anna Mikhailovna has a much greater importance than in St. Petersburg, at a party at Annette Шерер. You are welcome. So it can not be left behind. Every minute counts. I do not understand why the Princess hesitated. Maybe God will help me to find a way to cook it! ... Adieu, mon prince, que le bon Dieu vous soutienne ... [Good-bye, Prince, yes, God will sustain you. ] - Adieu, ma bonne, [Goodbye, my dear] - answered Prince Vasili, povertyvayas it. - Oh, he's in a terrible situation, - said the mother of his son, when they again sat in the carriage. - He almost nobody knows. - I do not know, mama, what his attitude to Pierre? - asked the son. - It says a will, my friend; from it and our fate depends ... - But why do you think he will leave us anything? - Oh, my friend! He is so rich, and we are so poor! - Well, that's not a good reason, mamma. - Oh my god! Oh my God! As it is bad! - exclaimed the mother. XVII When Anna Mikhaylovna went with his son to the Count Cyril Vladimirovich Bezukhov, Countess Rostova sat alone for a long time, putting a handkerchief to her eyes. Finally, she called. - What are you, my dear, - she said angrily the girl who forced herself to wait a few minutes. - Do not want to be, or what? So I'll find a place. The countess was upset by grief and abject poverty of his girlfriend and was therefore not in the spirit that has always expressed her maid name "sweet" and "you." - Guilty, sir, - said the maid. - Ask me a graph. Graf, swaying, went to his wife with slightly guiltily, as always. - Well, countess! What saute au madere [saute on Madeira] of the grouse will, ma chere! I tried; not for nothing that I have for a thousand rubles gave Tarasco. Worth it! He sat down beside his wife, leaning his hands on his knees valiantly and vzeroshivaya gray hair. - What do you want, Countess? - Listen, my friend, - what have you got blurred here? - she said, pointing to the vest. - It saute, right, - she added, smiling. - Look, Earl: I need money. Her face became sad. - Oh, Countess ... The count fidgeted, pulling wallet!. - I need much, count me five hundred rubles necessary. She took out a cambric handkerchief, rubbed them vest husband. - Now. Hey, who's there? - he shouted in a voice shout how only people who believe that those whom they call, they headlong rush to their call. - Send me Mitya! Dmitri, the nobleman's son, brought up in the count, who now was in charge of all his affairs, with soft steps into the room. - Look here, my dear, - he said the count logged respectful young man. - Bring you to me ... - he thought. - Yes, 700 rubles, yes. Yes see such tattered and dirty as the time, not sacrifice, and good for the Countess. - Yes, Dmitri, please, to clean, - said the countess, sighing sadly. - Your Excellency, when do you want to deliver? - Dmitri said. - If you please to know that ... But do not you worry, - he added, noticing that the count has already started to breathe heavily and that has always been a sign of incipient anger. - I was forgotten ... This minute do you want to deliver? - Yes, yes, something, bring it. Here the Countess give. - Ekoe gold I have this Dmitri, - added the count smiling, when a young man came out. - No that can not be. I can not stand it. Everything is possible. - Oh, the money, count money, how much of their misery in the world! - said the countess. - And the money I need. - You, countess, known spendthrift, - said the count, kissed his wife's hand, went back to the office. When Anna Mikhaylovna returned again on Bezukhov, Countess were already money, all brand-new pieces of paper under a handkerchief on the table, and Anna Mikhaylovna noticed that the countess something disturb. - Well, that, my friend? - I asked the countess. - Ah, in which it is a terrible situation! It can not be found, it is so bad, so bad; I pobyla minute and the two words are not said ... - Annette, for heaven's sake, do not deny me - suddenly said the countess, blushing, that it was so strange when it is young, lean and important face, getting out from under her shawl money. Anna M. immediately realized what was happening, and even stooped to in a minute due cleverly embrace the countess. - That's Boris from me, to sewing uniforms ... Anna M. too hugged her and cried. The countess wept too. They cried that they were good friends; and that they are good; and that they, the young girlfriendand engaged in such low subject - money; and that their youth has passed ... But tears were both enjoyable ... the XVIII Countess Rostov with his daughters and has a large number of guests sitting in the living room. Graf had male guests in the room, offering them his ohotnytsky collection of Turkish pipes. Occasionally he went out and asked: Do not come? Waited Marya Dmitrievna Ahrosimovu nicknamed in society le terrible dragon, [terrible dragon] lady famous not riches, not honors, but the directness of mind and frank simplicity of treatment. Marya Dmitrievna knew the royal family, knew all of Moscow and all of St. Petersburg, and both cities, surprised her, secretly laughed at her rudeness, told anecdotes about her; Nevertheless, all without exception respected and feared her. In the office, full of smoke, there was talk about the war, which was declared a manifesto on the set. Manifesto still has not read it, but everyone knew of his arrival. Earl sat on otomanke between the two neighbors and talk-smokers. Graf did not smoke and did not speak, and bowing his head, then to one side, then on the other, with evident pleasure looking at smokers and listened to a conversation between two of its neighbors, which he up against each other. One of the speakers was a civilian, with a wrinkled, jaundiced and thin, clean-shaven face, man, already approaching old age, though dressed as the most fashionable young man; He sat with his feet on otomanke overlooking the home of man and the side currently running far into the mouth amber, impulsively drew the smoke and screwed up his eyes. It was an old bachelor Shinshin, a cousin of the Countess, the evil tongue as he talked about living in Moscow. He seemed to condescend to his companion. Another, fresh, pink, Guards officer, perfectly washed, combed and buttoned, holding amber in the middle of the mouth and rosy lips slightly pulled the smoke, letting it ring of beautiful mouth. It was the Lieutenant Berg, an officer in the Semenov regiment with whom Boris rode together in the regiment, and that Natasha Faith teased, elder Countess, calling Berg her fiance. Earl sat between them and listened attentively. The best part for the graph activity, except for games in Boston, which he loved very much, was the position of the listener, especially when he was able to play off the two talkative interlocutors. - Well, how do you, my dear, mon tres honorable [esteemed] Alphonse Karlych - Shinshin said, laughing and joining (and what the point of his speech), the most popular Russian expression with exquisite French phrases. - Vous comptez vous faire des rentes sur l'etat, [you want to have an income from treasury] dohodets want to get to the company? - No, sir, Pyotr Nikolayevich, I only wish to show that in the cavalry benefits much less against infantry. Now realized, Peter Nikolayevich, my position ... Berg always spoke very precisely, quietly and politely. His conversation always concerned him alone; He is always calm silent while talking about something that has no direct relation to it. And to keep quiet so he could have a few hours, without feeling and without producing other the slightest embarrassment. But the conversation soon touched him personally, he began to speak at length and with evident pleasure. - realized my position, Peter Nikolayevich: I'll be in the cavalry, I would receive no more than two hundred rubles in the third, and the rank of lieutenant; and now I get two hundred and thirty - he said with a joyful, pleasant smile, looking Shinshin and Count, as though it was obvious to him that his success will always be the main goal of the desires of other people. - In addition, Peter Nikolayevich, going to the guard, I mean, - continued Berg - and vacancies in the Guards infantry much more. Then, reflect themselves, how I could get out of the two hundred and thirty rubles. I save and even send her father, - he continued, blowing ring. - La balance y est ... [Balance installed ...] German on the butt threshing bread, comme dit le rroverbe [as the proverb says,] - Amber shifting to the other side rta he said Shinshin and winked graph. Earl laughed. Other guests, seeing that Shinshin leads the conversation, came to listen. Berg, oblivious of ridicule or indifference, continued to talk about how to transfer to the Guards he had already won the rank in front of his teammates on the body, both in wartime the company commander can kill, and he, as senior in the company, can very easily be The company commander, and in the shelf all love him, and how his daddy happy with it. Berg evidently enjoyed telling it all, and seemed to be unaware of what other people may have the same interests. But all he said was so cute-grade, naive young self-interest it was so obvious, that he disarmed his hearers. - Well, sir, you are in the infantry and cavalry, everywhere you go in motion; I prophesy to you, - said Shinshin, patting him on the shoulder and taking his feet with otomanki. Berg smiled happily. Graf, and behind it and the guests went into the living room. It was a time before the dinner party, when the assembled guests do not start a long conversation while waiting for the call to snack, and at the same time feel the need to move and do not be silent, to show that they are not at all impatient to sit down. The owners are looking at the door, and occasionally exchanging glances with each other. Guests of these views are trying to guess who or what else waiting for: the important relative latecomer, or foods that have not yet ripened. Pierre arrived just before dinner and sat awkwardly in the middle of the living room on the first available seat, blocking the entire road. The countess wanted to make him talk, but he fondly looked at the glasses around him, as if looking for someone, and curtly answered all the questions of the countess. He was shy and did not notice this one. Most of the guests, who knew his history with the bear curiously looked at this big fat and humble man, wondering how could such a goof and modesty to do such a thing with this quarter. - Are you new here? - I asked him the Countess. - Oui, madame, [Yes, ma'am,] - he replied, looking around. - You have not seen my husband? - Non, madame. [No, ma'am. ] - He smiled quite inappropriately. - You seem to have recently been in Paris? I think it's very interesting. - Very interesting .. The countess exchanged glances with Anna Mikhaylovna. Anna M. realized that she is asked to take this young man, and, sitting down beside him and began to talk about her father; but just as the Countess, he only answered her in monosyllables. The guests were all busy with each other. Les Razoumovsky ... ca a ete charmant ... Vous etes bien bonne ... La comtesse Apraksine ... [Razumovsky ... It was delicious ... You're very kind ... Countess Apraksin ...] could be heard from all sides. The countess got up and went into the hall. - Marya Dmitrievna? - I heard her voice from the hall. - She is - came in response to a coarse woman's voice, and after that came into the room, Marya Dmitrievna. All the young ladies and even the ladies, except the oldest, stood up. Marya Dmitrievna stopped at the door and, with the height of his fat body, holding high her fifty years with gray curls head, looked around the guests and, as if rolling up, straightened slowly wide sleeves of her dress. Marya Dmitrievna always said in Russian. - Birthday Girl way with children - she said in his loud, thick voice overpowering all other sounds. - What are you, old sinner, - she said to the count, kissed her hand, - tea, bored in Moscow? Dogs chase nowhere? What, sir, do, that's how these birds grow up ... - She pointed at the girls. - You want - you do not want, it is necessary to look for suitors. - Well, that, my Cossack? (Marya Dmitrievna called Natasha a Cossack) - she said, caressing the hand Natasha approach to her hand without fear and fun. - I know that girl a potion, and love. She took out a huge reticule of blue earrings pear and giving their name day-siyavshey and flushed Natasha, immediately turned away from her and turned to Pierre. - Uh, uh! kind! Come here, - she said, mock soft and delicate voice. - Go-ka, dear ... And she angrily rolled up her sleeves still higher. Pierre approached, looking fondly at her over his glasses. - Come, come, my dear! I am a father and thy truth something one said, when he was in the case, and you-and God commands. She paused. Everyone was silent, waiting for what will be, and feeling that it was only the preface. - Well, nothing to say! Good boy! ... His father lies on his bed, and he was amused, bear riding on a quarterly plants. Shame on you, sir, shame on you! It would be better for the war was going. She turned and gave her hand to the count, who barely keep from laughing. - Well, then, to the table, I have tea, it's time? - said Marya Dmitrievna. Earl went ahead with Marya Dmitrievna; Then the Countess, which led the colonel of hussars, the right person with whom Nicholas had to catch up with the regiment. Anna M. - with Shinshin. Berg gave Vera's hand. Smiling Julie Karagin went to Nicholas to the table. They were followed by still other couples, stretching across the room, and behind all of lone children, tutors and governesses. Waiters moved, chairs clattered, the choir struck up the music, and the guests are located. home of Count sound of music replaced the sounds of knives and forks, said guests, silent waiters steps. At one end of the table he sat at the head of the Countess. Right Marya Dmitrievna, left Anna M. and other guests. At the other end sat the count, left colonel of hussars, right Shinshin and other male guests. On one side of the long section youth older Vera near Berg, Pierre beside Boris; on the other hand - the children, tutors and governesses. Count of crystal bottles and vases with fruit looked at his wife and her tall cap with blue ribbons and diligently pouring wine to their neighbors, not forgetting themselves. Countess as well, because of the pineapple, not forgetting the duties hostess, threw significant glances at her husband, whose bald head and face, it seemed to her, his reds sharply differed from the gray hair. At the end of the ladies even went babbling; in the men's louder and louder voices heard, especially the hussar colonel, who did so much to eat and drink more and more blushing, that the Count has put him up as an example to other guests. Berg said with a gentle smile Vera that love is not a feeling of earthly and heavenly. Boris called his new friend Pierre former guests at the table and exchanging glances with Natasha, sitting against him. Pierre spoke little, looked around the new faces and a lot of eating. Starting from two soups, of which he chose a la tortue, [tortoise] and pie and to grouse he did not miss a single dish and a single wine that butler wrapped napkin bottle mysteriously bobbing over his shoulder neighbor, saying, or " Dray-Madeira "or" Hungarian "or" hock ". He substituted a first available four crystal, with the monogram of the graph, glasses, standing in front of each unit, and drunk with pleasure, all the more enjoyable and more looking at the views of the guests. Natasha, who was sitting opposite him, looking at Boris as girls of thirteen look at the boy, whom they first had just kissed and that they are in love. This is the view it is sometimes addressed to Pierre, and under his eyes this funny, lively girl wanted to laugh himself, without knowing why. Nicholas sat away from Sony, beside Julie Karagina, and again with the same involuntary smile was saying something to her. Sonia smiled parade, but apparently tormented by jealousy: it paled, then blushed and with all listened to what they talked between themselves Nicholas and Julie. Governess looking uneasily as if preparing a to resist, if anyone even think to hurt children. Tutor, a German tried to remember howling birth dishes, desserts and wines, in order to describe everything in detail in a letter to the home to Germany, very offended by the fact that the butler with a bottle wrapped in a napkin, to enclose it. German frowning, trying to show the form that he did not want to get this wine, but took offense because no one would understand that the wine had to be him, not in order to quench their thirst, not out of greed, but because of good curiosity. XIX On the men's side of the table the conversation more and more animated. The colonel said that the manifesto declaring war is already out in St. Petersburg and that a copy of which he had seen, now delivered by courier in chief. - And why hard we shall fight with Bonaparte? - Shinshin said. - II a deja rabattu le caquet a l'Autriche. Je crains, que cette fois ce ne soit notre tour. [He has already knocked down a peg or Austria. I'm afraid I would not have come now our turn. ] The Colonel was a dense, tall and sanguine German obviously campaigner and a patriot. He was offended words Shinshin. - A puff um, m ylost yvy Emperor, - he said, pronouncing ex evmesto vmesto s. - Zatem that counts erator is zna floor. He Manifa est eskazal that Mr. emozh floor smotret indifferent to threats to Russia, and that b ezopasnost empire, the dignity of it, and the sanctity of unions - he said, for some reason, especially leaning on the word "union", as if that was the whole essence of the case. And with his characteristic infallibility official memory he repeated the opening words of the manifesto ... "and desire unique and indispensable goal of the sovereign is: settle in Europe on solid bases the world - have decided him to move now part of the troops overseas and to make to the achievement of" the intention of this new effort ". - zachem Here, m ylost yvy Emperor, - he concluded didactically drinking a glass of wine and looking at the count for the promotion. - Connaissez vous le proverbe: [You know the proverb:] "Erema, Erema, you would be sitting at home, have sharpened their spindles" - Shinshin said, frowning and smiling. - Cela nous convient a merveille. [This is our way. ] On what Suvorov - and to smash, a plate couture, [in the head] and where y us Suvorovs now? Je vous demande un peu, [I ask you] - constantly jumping from Russian into French, he said. - We must fight until after the ERI ekapli shelter - said the colonel, striking the table - and mind er-rr floor of its ego eratora imp, and then entirely hey bud floor well. But argue as mo-o-You can (he especially drew voice on the word "can"), as the mo-o-You can less then - he finish, again referring to the graph. - So the old hussars judge, that's all. And how do you judge uh, a young man and a young hussar? - he added, turning to Nicholas, who, when he heard that it was a question about the war, left his companion and the Colonel listened with wide eyes watching and all ears. - I quite agree - answered Nikolai, all blushing, turning the plate and moving the cups with a determined and desperate looking as if at this moment he was subjected to great danger, - I am convinced that the Russian have to die or win, - he said, he felt the same way as the other, after the word has been said that it was too enthusiastically and pompous for the present case and therefore uncomfortable. - C'est bien beau ce que vous venez de dire, [Fine! well what you said] - he said, sitting beside him, Julie, sighing. Sonya trembled all over and blushed to the ears, behind the ears and up to the neck and shoulders, while Nikolai said. Pierre listened to the speeches of Colonel and nodded approvingly. - That's nice - he said. - hey are real hussar, young chelovek - Colonel shouted, banging on the table again. - What do you make noise there? - suddenly I came across the desk bass voice Marya Dmitrievna. - What do you knock on the table? - she said to the hussar, - who are you hot? true, I think it's the French in front of you? - I'm telling the truth - smiling Hussar said. - All about the war - he shouted across the table graph. - After all, my son goes, Marya Dmitrievna's son goes. - And I have four sons in the army, and I do not tuzhu. On all the will of God: and in the furnace lying die in battle, God will have mercy, - sounded without any effort, from the end of the table a thick voice Marya Dmitrievna. - This is true. And the conversation again focused - a lady on his end of the table, man on his own. - But do not ask, - he said Natasha's little brother - but do not ask! - I asked - answered Natasha. Her face suddenly broke out, expressing a desperate and cheerful determination. She got up, inviting look Pierre, who sat opposite her, listen, and turned to his mother: - Mom! - sounded around the table with her child, throaty voice. - What do you want? - the countess said, frightened, but, daughters face when he saw that it was a prank, strictly waved her hand, making a threatening gesture and a negative head. The conversation fell silent. - Mama! a cake is? - more decisively, not falling down sounded voice of Natasha. Countess wanted to frown, but she could not. Marya Dmitrievna shook a thick finger. - Kazak, - she said with a threat. Most of the guests looked at the older, not knowing how to take this trick. - That I love you! - said the countess. - Mama! that the cake be? - Natasha cried boldly and capriciously fun, forward confident that her prank would be well received. Sonya and Petya thick hide with laughter. - That said, - whispered Natasha and little brother Pierre, whom she looked up again. - Ice cream, only you will not give - said Marya Dmitrievna. Natasha saw nothing to fear, and therefore was not afraid, and Marya Dmitrievna. - Marya Dmitrievna? some ice cream! I do not like cream. - Carrot. - No, what? Marya Dmitrievna, what? - she almost shouted. - I want to know! Marya Dmitrievna and the countess burst out laughing, and behind them all the guests. Everyone laughed not answer Marya Dmitrievna, but unfathomable courage and skill of the girls knew how to, and dared to go to treat Marya Dmitrievna. Natasha behind only when she was told that it would be pineapple. - Yes. - chtop a third strike shiv remained. - And what was cool man! - said the adjutant. - And who will this wealth? - he added in a whisper. - Okotnik there - smiling, replied the German. All I looked again at the door: it creaked, and the second princess, making a drink, shown Lorrain, carried it to the patient. The German doctor went up to Lorrain. - Still, maybe I make it to tomorrow morning? - I asked the German badly pronouncing French. Lorrain, pursing his lips, severely and negatively waved a finger in front of his nose. - Tonight, not later - he said quietly, with a decent smile of self-satisfaction that is able to clearly understand and express the position of the patient, and walked away. Meanwhile Prince Vasili opened the door to the room Princess. The room was half dark; Only two oil lamps burned before images, and well smelled of smoking and flowers. The room was set finely furnished shifonerok, cupboard, tables. From behind the screen I could see the white bedspread high feather bed. A dog barked. - Oh, it's you, mon cousin? She stood up and smoothed her hair, which she always has, even now, were so incredibly smooth, as if they were made of one piece with the head and lacquered. - What happened to something? - she asked. - I'm so scared. - Nothing, everything is the same; I just came to talk to you, Catiche, business, - said the prince, tired of sitting on the chair from which she stood. - How do you warmed, however, - he said, - Well, sit down here, causons. [Talk. ] - I thought, if that happened? - said the princess with their unchanged, stone-strict expression of the village against the prince, ready to listen. - I wanted to sleep, mon cousin, I can not. - Well, that, my dear? - said Prince Vasili, taking the hand of the princess and her ducking his habit down. It was evident that it was "well, that" applies to many such that, without naming, they understand both. The princess, with his incongruous is the length of the legs, by the dry and straight waist, straight and stared at impassive Prince bulging gray eyes. She shook her head and sighed, looked at the image. Gesture it could be explained as an expression of sadness and devotion, and as an expression of weariness and hope for an early vacation. Prince Vasili explained this gesture as an expression of fatigue. - And me something - he said, - do you think is easier? Je suis ereinte, comme un cheval de poste; [I Zamora, as a post horse; ] But still I need to talk to you, Catiche, and very serious. Prince Vassily paused, and his cheeks began to twitch nervously on the first one and then the other side, giving his face an unpleasant expression, which never shows on Prince Vasili's face, when he was in the living room. His eyes, too, were not the same as always: they looked impudently-jokingly, then looked frightened. Princess, his dry, thin arms holding the dog on her lap, stared into the eyes of Prince Vasili; but it was clear that it does not interrupt the silence in question, even if she had to keep quiet until morning. - Well, you see, my dear princess and cousin, Katerina Semyonovna - continued Prince Vasili, apparently not without inner struggle Getting to continue his speech - in such moments, as now, we must think about everything. We need to think about the future, about you ... I love you all like your children, you know that. Princess as dim and still looking at him. - Finally, it is necessary to think about my family, - angrily pushing away from you table and not looking at her, continued Prince Vasili, - you know, Catiche you, three sisters Mammoth, and even my wife, we have some direct descendants of Count. I know, I know how hard for you to talk and think about things. And it does not help; but, my friend, my sixth decade, we must be ready for anything. You see, I know sent for Pierre, and that the graph directly pointing to his portrait, demanded him to her? Prince Vasili looked questioningly at the princess, but he could not understand, to consider whether it is what he said to her, or just looking at him ... - I'm one never ceases to pray, mon cousin, - she said, - that he may have mercy on him, and would give his beautiful soul calmly to leave this ... - Yes, it is, - impatiently continued Prince Vasili, rubbing his bald head, and again angrily moving up to him moved away table - but, finally ... finally the thing is, you know yourself that the past winter Earl wrote a will in which he's estate, in addition to the direct heirs and us, Dep aval Pierre. - Not if he wrote wills! - calmly said the princess. - Pierre But he could not bequeath. Pierre illegal. - Ma chere, - said Prince Vasili suddenly, clutching to his table, livening up and began to speak quickly - but what if the letter is written to the sovereign, and the Count asks Pierre to adopt? You see, on the merits of his request would count respecting ... princess smiled as people smile at people who think they know the deal more than those with whom you are talking. - I'll tell you more - continued Prince Vasili, seizing her by the arm, - the letter was written, but not sent, and the emperor knew about it. The only question is whether it has been destroyed or not. If not, how soon all be over - Prince Vasili sighed, giving it clear chtoon went without saying the words all is over - and vskroyut paper graph, a testament to the letter will be handed over to the Emperor, and his request will probably be honored. Pierre as the legitimate son, get everything. - A part of us? - Princess asked, smiling ironically as though everything, but not this could happen. - Mais, ma pauvre Catiche, c'est clair, comme le jour. [But, my dear Catiche, it is clear as day. ] He then rightful heir to one of all, and you do not get any of that here. You must know, my dear, whether the will and letter were written, and whether they are destroyed. And if for some reason they are forgotten, you must know where they are and find them because ... - It just missed! - interrupted the princess, smiling sardonically and not changing expression eyes. - I am a woman; do you think we are stupid; but I know enough that an illegitimate son can not inherit ... Un batard, [illegal] - she added, believing this translation finally show the futility of his prince. - Do not you understand, finally, Catiche! You're so smart: do not you see, - if the Count wrote to the Emperor, asking him to recognize the legitimate son, so, too, Pierre will not be Pierre and Count Bezukhov, and he will receive all the bequest? And if the will is not destroyed with the letter, then you consolation except that you were virtuous et tout ce qui s'en suit, [and all that this implies,] there is nothing left. It's right. - I know that the will is written; but I know too that it is invalid, and you have, it seems, think for a perfect fool, mon cousin, - said the princess with the expression with which say women who believe that they said something clever and insulting. - You are my Sweetheart Princess Catherine Semenovna, - eagerly began Prince Vasili. - I came to you not in order to spar with you, and to ensure that both the mother, good, good, the true home, to talk about your own interests. I'm telling you for the tenth time that if the letter to the Emperor, and will in favor of Pierre is in the graph paper, that you, my dear, and my sisters, not heir. If you do not believe me, then believe me people who know: I'm talking with Dimitri Onufriichem (it was the lawyer of the house), he said the same. Apparently, something suddenly changed in the minds of Princess; thin lips were pale (the eyes are the same), and the voice, while she spoke, broke such peals, which she probably did not expect. - That would be good, - she said. - I do not want and do not want. She threw her dog from her knees and straightened her dress. - That's gratitude, that's gratitude to people who have sacrificed everything for him, - she said. - Perfectly! Very well! I do not want anything, Prince. - Yes, but you are not alone, you have a sister, - said Prince Vasili. But the princess did not listen to him. - Yes, I had known but had forgotten that, besides meanness, deceit, envy, intrigue, except ingratitude, the blackest ingratitude, nothing I could not be expected in this house ... - Do you know or do not know where it will? - I asked Prince Vasili with even more than before, twitching cheek. - Yes, I was stupid, I still believed in people and loved them and sacrificed themselves. A time to only those that are vile and disgusting. I know whose intrigues. The princess wanted to get up, but the prince held her hand. Princess was the kind of person suddenly disappointed in all the human race; she angrily looked at his companion. - There is still time, my friend. You remember Catiche that all this was done unintentionally, in a moment of anger, sickness, and then forgotten. Our duty, my dear, to correct his mistake, to ease his last moments so as not to allow him to make this injustice, not to let him die in his thoughts that he did miserable those people ... - those people who sacrificed everything for him - caught Princess, the rush to get up again, but the prince did not let her - which he had never been able to appreciate. No, mon cousin, - she added with a sigh, - I'll remember that in this world we can not expect a reward, that in this world there is neither honor nor justice. In this world you have to be cunning and an evil. - Well, voyons, [listen] relax; I know your beautiful heart. - No, I have an evil heart. - I know your heart, - repeated Prince - I appreciate your friendship and wish you to be for me the same opinion. Calm down and parlons raison, [talk plainly] while there is time - maybe a day, maybe an hour; Tell me everything you know about the will, and, most importantly, where it is: you must know. We now take it and show the graph. He must have forgotten about him and want to destroy it. You understand that my one desire - to faithfully carry out his will; I then just come here. I am here only to help him and you. - Now I understand everything. I know whose intrigues. I know - said the princess. - Not the point, my dear. - This is your protegee, [favorite] your sweet princess Drubetskaya, Anna M., which I did not want to have a maid, this nasty, nasty woman. - Ne perdons point de temps. [Let's not waste time. ] - Ax, do not say! Last winter she rubbed here and such nasty things, such skvernosti talked a count on all of us, especially Sophie - I can not repeat - that the count became ill and two weeks did not want us to see. At this time, I know that he wrote this nasty, nasty paper; but I thought that this paper does not mean anything. - Nous y voila, [That's the thing. ] Why did you first did not say anything to me? - The inlaid portfolio that he keeps under his pillow. Now I know - said the princess, not answering. - Yes, if there are for me the sin, a great sin, it is hatred for this merzavke - almost cried the princess, had completely changed. - And why did she rubbed here? But I will express her everything, everything. The time will come! XXII While such conversations took place in the reception area and in Knyazhnin rooms, coach Pierre (for whom it was sent) and Anna Mikhaylovna (who found it necessary to go with him) rode into the courtyard of Count Bezukhov. When the wheels of the carriage sounded softly on the straw, nastlannoy under the windows, Anna Mikhaylovna, turning to his companion with comforting words, I make sure that he was sleeping in the corner of the carriage, and woke him up. Rousing himself, Pierre behind by Anna Mikhaylovna stepped out of the carriage, and only then think about a date with his dying father which awaited him. He noticed that they came not to the front and to the rear entrance. While he went to the steps, two people in the middle-class clothes hastily ran back from the entrance in the shadow of the wall. Suspend, Pierre saw in the shadow of the house on both sides of several of the same people. But neither Anna Mikhaylovna nor the footman nor the coachman, who could not see these people did not pay attention to them. Was-to-be, it must be so, I decided to bring himself Pierre and followed by Anna Mikhailovna. Anna M. hasty steps went up slightly illuminated by a narrow stone staircase, beckoning to lag behind it, Pierre, who, although he did not understand why he had to do to go to the count, much less why he had to go by the back stairs, but judging by the confidence and haste Anna Mikhaylovna, decided to myself that it was a necessary need. Halfway the stairs nearly knocked them off their feet, some people with buckets, which noisily ran to meet them. These people are pressed against the wall to let Pierre and Anna Mikhaylovna, and did not show the slightest surprise at the sight of them. - where half the princesses? - said Anna Mikhaylovna of one of them ... - Here, - replied the waiter bold, loud voice, as if now everything has been possible - the door to the left, my mother. - Maybe the count did not call me, - said Pierre while he went to the site - I would go to him. Anna Mikhaylovna paused to drew level with Pierre. - Ah, mon ami! - she said with the same gesture in the morning with his son, dotrogivayas his arm: - croyez, que je souffre autant, que vous, mais soyez homme. [Believe me, I am suffering as you are, but be a man. ] - Right, I'm going? - Pierre asked, gently through the glasses looking at Anna Mikhaylovna. - Ah, mon ami, oubliez les torts qu'on a pu avoir envers vous, pensez que c'est votre pere ... peut-etre a l'agonie. - She sighed. - Je vous ai tout de suite aime comme mon fils. Fiez vous a moi, Pierre. Je n'oublirai pas vos interets. [Forget, my friend, what have you against wrong. Remember, it's your father ... Maybe in agony. I immediately fell in love with you, son. Trust me, Pierre. I will not forget your interests. ] Pierre did not understand; Again it even stronger impression that everything is as it should be, and he obediently followed by Anna Mikhailovna has already opened the door. Door opens in front of a backing. In the corner sat an old servant of the princesses and knit stocking. Pierre had never been to this part, did not assume the existence of such chambers. Anna M. asked overtake them with a decanter on a tray, the girls (calling it a sweet and dear) on health and princesses Pierre led down the stone corridor. The first door to the left led into the living rooms of the princesses from the corridor. The maid, with a decanter, in a hurry (as everything was done in a hurry at that moment in the house) did not shut the door, and Pierre and Anna Mikhaylovna in passing, inadvertently looked into the room, where talking, sitting close to each other elder princess with Prince Vasili. Seeing pass, Prince Vasili made an impatient movement and leaned back; Princess jumped up and desperate gesture with all his might shut the door, shut it. This gesture was so unlike perpetual serenity princess, fear, manifested in the person of Prince Vasili was so nesvoystven its importance, that Pierre, stopping, questioning, through the glasses, looked at its chairwoman. Anna M. has not expressed surprise, she just smiled slightly and sighed as if to indicate that all of this she had expected. - Soyez homme, mon ami, c'est moi qui veillerai a vos interets, [be a man, my friend, I will observe for your interests. ] - she said in answer to his look and even went down the hall soon. Pierre did not understand what was going on, and even less what it meant veiller a vos interets, [to guard your interests,] but he knew that all this must be so. Corridor they went into half-lit room, adjacent to the reception count. It was one of those cold and luxurious rooms that Pierre knew the front porch. But in this room, in the middle, it was an empty tub, and the water was spilled on the carpet. Meet them out on tiptoe, not paying attention to them, the servant and the clerk with a censer. They entered the familiar Pierre receiving with two Italian windows, access to the winter garden, with large breasts and a full-length portrait of Catherine. All the same people, in almost the same positions, sitting, whispering in the waiting room. All smolknuv, looked at the newcomer Anna Mikhaylovna, with her isplakannym, pale face, and a thick, large Pierre, who, with his head down, obediently followed her. At Anna Mikhaylovna's face expressed the consciousness that the decisive moment came; She, with the methods of business ladies in St. Petersburg, went into the room, not letting myself Pierre, even bolder than in the morning. She felt that since it is for him the one who wanted to see the dying, the reception it was provided. Peek glance at all that were in the room, and seeing Grafova confessor, it is not something that bent, but suddenly becoming smaller in stature, small amble swam to the confessor and respectfully took the blessing of one, then another cleric. - Thank God that had - she said a spiritual person - we are all family, were so afraid. This young man - the son of the Count, - she added quietly. - A terrible minute! Having uttered these words, she went to the doctor. - Cher docteur, - she said to him, - ce jeune homme est le fils du comte ... y at-il de l'espoir? [This young man - the son of the Count ... Is there any hope? ] Dr. silence, quick movement lifted up his eyes and shoulders. Anna M. exactly the same movement erected shoulders and eyes, almost closing them, sighed and moved away from the doctor to Pierre. It is particularly respectful and delicate sadly turned to Pierre. - Ayez confiance en Sa misericorde, [Trust in His mercy] - she told him, pointing out to him the sofa to sit down to wait for her, she quietly walked to the door, on which all watched and followed a barely audible sound of the door hidden behind it. Pierre, having decided to obey all its chairwoman, went to the couch, which she pointed out to him. As soon as Anna Mikhaylovna had disappeared, he said that the views of all who were in the room, more than a curiosity, and with the participation of hit him. He noticed that all whispered, pointing to his eyes as if in fear and even servility. just shrugged with a sense of his arm below the shoulder. Pierre and Anna Mikhaylovna took place in the petit salon. [A small living room. ] - II n'y a rien qui restaure, comme une tasse de cet excellent the russe apres une nuit blanche, [Nothing retrieves after restless night as excellent cup of tea Russian. ] - Lorrain said with a look of understated vivacity, sipping from a thin, non-stick, Chinese dishes, standing in front of a small round living room table, on which stood the tea service and a cold supper. Around the table together, to bolster his strength, all were in that night in the house of Count Bezukhov. Pierre well remembered this small circular drawing room, with mirrors and small tables. At the time of the balls in the count's house, Pierre, did not know how to dance, I loved to sit in the little mirror and watch the ladies in evening dress, by jewels and pearls on bare shoulders, passing through the room, gazed themselves in brightly lit mirrors, repeated several times their reflections. Now the same room was barely lit by two candles, and the middle of the night on a small table randomly were tea service and dishes, and a variety of, ferial people whisper talking, sitting in it, every move, every word to indicate that one does not forget that what is being done now is still to take place in the bedroom. Pierre did not have, even though he really wanted to. He looked questioningly at his chairwoman and saw that it came out on tiptoe back into the waiting room, where he stayed with Prince Vasili elder princess. Pierre thought that it was so necessary, and after a pause a bit, went for it. Anna M. was standing beside the princess, and they are both at the same time talking agitated whisper: - Allow me, Princess, to know what is necessary and what is unnecessary, - said the princess, obviously, being in the same agitated state in which it was at the time as slammed the door of his room. - But, dear princess, - humbly and earnestly said Anna Mikhaylovna, who took the road from the bedroom, and not letting the princess, - if it will not be too hard on poor uncle at such a moment, when he needs a rest? At such times, talking about the mundane, when his soul is already prepared ... Prince Vasili sat on a chair in his familiarity pose high with his legs crossed. His cheeks are strongly jumped and fallen, seemed thicker at the bottom; but he had the look of a man engaged in a little conversation between two ladies. - Voyons, ma bonne Anna M., laissez faire Catiche. [Leave Kate to do what she knows. ] Do you know how the count loves her. - I did not know that in this paper - said the princess, turning to Prince Vasili and pointing to the inlaid portfolio she held in her hands. - I only know that this last will and testament in his office and it is a forgotten paper ... She wanted to get around Anna Mikhaylovna, but Anna M., jumped again blocked her way. - I know, dear, kind princess, - said Anna Mikhaylovna, seizing the hand of the portfolio and so hard that it was obvious she did not let him soon. - Sweetheart Princess, I beg you, I beg you, have pity on him. Je vous en conjure ... [I beseech you ...] Princess was silent. Were heard only the sounds of efforts to combat a portfolio za. It was evident that if she spoke, the talk is not flattering to Anna Mikhaylovna. Anna Mikhaylovna held firmly, but, although her voice held all their sweet softness and malleability. - Pierre, come here, my friend. I think that he did not once in the parent council: whether the prince is not it? - Why are you silent, mon cousin? - suddenly she shrieked the princess so loud that we heard in the living room and they were afraid of her voice. - What are you silent when there God knows who allow themselves to get involved and make a scene in the doorway of the dying. Schemer! - she whispered angrily and pulled portfolio with all his strength. But Anna M. took a few steps to keep up with the portfolio, and caught his hand. - Oh! - said Prince Vasili, surprised and reproachful. He got up. - C'est ridicule. Voyons, [That's funny. Well, the same] empty. I'm telling you. Princess has taken. - And you! Anna M. has not obeyed it. - Let go, I tell you. I take everything on myself. I will go and ask him. I ... rather you this. - Mais, mon prince, [But the prince] - Anna M. said - after such a great Thainstva give him a moment's peace. Here, Pierre, tell me your opinion - she turned to the young man, who came up to him, looked surprised to be removed, which has lost all decency face princess and jumps on the cheeks of Prince Vasili. - Remember that you are responsible for all the consequences - strictly said Prince Vasili, - you do not know what you're doing. - Vile woman! - he cried the princess, suddenly rushing at Anna Mikhaylovna and snatching the portfolio. Prince Vasili lowered his head and shrugged his shoulders. At that moment the door, the terrible door, which Pierre was looking for so long and is so quietly opened, quickly, noisily sat, slamming against the wall, and the average princess ran from there and threw up her hands. - What are you doing! - she said desperately. - II s'en va et vous me laissez seule. [He dies, and you leave me alone. ] The eldest princess dropped her briefcase. Anna M. quickly bent down and picked up a controversial thing, ran to the bedroom. The eldest princess and Prince Vasili, recollecting himself, and went after her. A few minutes later she came out first the eldest princess, with a pale, dry face and lower lip bitten. At the sight of Pierre her face expressed irrepressible anger. - Yes, rejoice now - she said - you waited. And, sobbing, she covered her face with a handkerchief and ran from the room. Princess went for Prince Vasili. He staggered, went to the sofa on which Pierre was sitting, and fell on him, closing her eyes. Pierre noticed that he was pale and that his lower jaw was jumping and shaking, as in the feverish trembling. - Oh, my friend! - he said, taking Pierre by the elbow; and his voice was a sincerity and weakness, which Pierre had never noticed it. - How much we sin, we deceive many, and all for what? I fifties, my friend ... For me ... it's all over with death, everything. Death is terrible. - He cried. Anna M. came last. She walked over to Pierre quiet, slow steps. - Pierre ... - she said. Pierre looked at her questioningly. She kissed him on the forehead of a young man, his tears dampening. She paused. - II n'est plus ... [he was gone ...] Pierre looked at her over his glasses. - Allons, je vous reconduirai. Tachez de pleurer. Rien ne soulage, comme les larmes. [Come, I'll take you. Try to cry: nothing is easier, as the tears. ] She led him into the dark drawing room and Pierre was glad that no one there did not see his face. Anna Mikhaylovna left him, and when she returned, he put it under his head hand, fast asleep. The next morning Anna Mikhaylovna said to Pierre: - Oui, mon cher, c'est une grande perte pour nous tous. Je ne parle pas de vous. Mais Dieu vous soutndra, vous etes jeune et vous voila a la tete d'une immense fortune, je l'espere. Le testament n'a pas ete encore ouvert. Je vous connais assez pour savoir que cela ne vous tourienera pas la tete, mais cela vous impose des devoirs, et il faut etre homme. [Yes, my friend, is a great loss for all of us, not to mention you. But God will support you, you are young, and here you are now, I hope the owner of vast wealth. A testament not yet excavated. I'm pretty you know and I am sure that it has not gone to your head; but it imposes a duty on you; and it is necessary to be a man. ] Pierre was silent. - Peut-etre plus tard je vous dirai, mon cher, que si je n'avais pas ete la, Dieu sait ce qui serait arrive. Vous savez, mon oncle avant-hier encore me promettait de ne pas oublier Boris. Mais il n'a pas eu le temps. J'espere, mon cher ami, que vous remplirez le desir de votre pere. [After I may be, I will tell you that if I were not there, God knows what would have happened. You know that uncle of the third day I had promised not to forget Boris, but could not. I hope, my friend, you will fulfill the desire of his father. ] Pierre, understanding nothing, and silently, blushing shyly, staring at the Princess Anna Mikhaylovna. After talking with Pierre, Anna Mikhaylovna went to Rostov and went to bed. Waking up in the morning, she told the Rostovs and all the familiar details of the death of Count Bezukhov. She said that the Count died as she wanted to die, that his end was not only touching but edifying; Recently, the same date between father and son was so touching that she could not recall it without tears, and she does not know that - who is better behaved in these terrible moments: father if that is the way it all remembered at the last minute and are touching words said to his son, and Pierre, who was a pity to see how he was killed and how, in spite of this, I tried to hide my sadness so as not to disappoint his dying father. «C'est penible, mais cela fait du bien; ca eleve l'ame de voir des hommes, comme le vieux comte et son digne fils », [It's hard, but it is salutary; soul stands, when you see people like the old count and his worthy son,] she said. About actions princess and Prince Vasili she does not approve them, spoke too, but in strict confidence and in a whisper. XXV in Bald Hills, the estate of Prince Nikolai Andreyevich Bolkonsky, expecting every day the arrival of the young Prince Andrew with the princess; but the wait did not violate the harmonious order for which was life in the house of the old prince. The general-in-chief, Prince Nikolai Andreyevich, nicknamed in society le roi de Prusse, [King of Prussia,] since that time, as in Paul was exiled to the village, there lived without a break in his Bald Hills with her daughter, Princess Mary, and her companion, m-lle Bourienne. [Mademoiselle Burien. ] And in the new reign, although he was allowed to enter the capital, he also continued uninterruptedly live in the country, saying that if someone it is necessary, that and from Moscow and fifty miles will arrive at Bald Hills, and that he was not anybody or anything necessary. He said that there are only two sources of human vices: idleness and superstition, and that there are only two virtues: activities and mind. He was engaged in the education of his daughter, and to sharpen its two cardinal virtues, to twenty years to give her lessons algebra and geometry, and distributed her entire life in uninterrupted employment. He was always busy with the writing of his memoirs, the calculations of higher mathematics, turning snuffboxes on the machine, the work in the garden and watching over the buildings that did not stop at his estate. Since the main condition for the activity is the order, then the order in his way of life was brought to the highest degree of accuracy. It outputs to the table occurred at the same constant conditions, and not only in the same hour, but a minute. With people around him, from the daughter to the servants, the prince was sharp and always-demanding, and therefore, who is not ill, he aroused to fear and reverence, which is not easy and could make a very cruel man. Despite the fact that he was retired and now had no meaning in public affairs, each chief of that province, which was the estate of the prince, thought it his duty to come to him, and in the same way as an architect, gardener, or Princess Mary, waiting for the appointed hours in a high yield Prince ofitsiantskoy. And everyone in this ofitsiantskoy experienced the same feeling of respect and even fear, while opened the hugely-high door of the office and show up in a powdered wig low figure of an old man with small dry handles and gray drooping eyebrows, sometimes he nasuplivalsya, veiled shine smart and bright eyes exactly young. On arrival the young, in the morning, as usual, Princess Mary entered at the appointed hour for the morning greeting ofitsiantskuyu and fear baptized and read the internal prayer. Every day, she came every day and prayed to a daily meeting went off well. Sitting in ofitsiantskoy powdered old servant in a low traffic rose and a whisper reported: "Come." From behind the door could be heard the sound of the machine uniform. The princess timidly tugged easily and smoothly opened the door and stood at the entrance. Prince worked for the machine, and looking round, continued his work. Huge office was filled with things, obviously, constantly-uses. A large table, on which lay books and plans, high glass cabinets library with the keys in the door, a tall table for writing in a standing position, on which lay an open book, a lathe, with the expansion tool and are scattered around shavings - all showed a constant, varied and decent work. According to the movement of small feet, shod in Tatar, embroidered with silver boot on solid overlap sinewy, lean hand was visible in Prince still resistant and withstand a lot of force fresh age. Having done a few laps, he took his foot off the pedal the machine, wiped his chisel, threw it into a leather pouch, attach to the machine, and came to the table, called the daughter. He never blessed their children, and only substituting her bristly, still unshaven cheek now, he said, strict and at the same time carefully looking around her, gently: - health ... Well, sit down! He took the book of geometry, to write with his hand, foot and pushed his chair. - For tomorrow! - he said, quickly trying to find a page and from paragraph to another Noting hard nail. Princess bent down to the table of notebook. - Wait, letter to you - suddenly the old man said, reaching across the table to attach from his pocket an envelope inscribed a woman's hand and throwing it on the table. Princess face covered with red spots at the letter. She hurriedly took it and bent down to him. - By Eloise? - he asked the prince, chilly smile showing still strong and yellowish teeth. - Yes, by Julie - said Princess, glancing timidly and shyly smiling. - Two letters to miss, and the third read - strictly said the prince - I'm afraid a lot of nonsense writing. The third read. - Read it though, mon pere, [my father] - answered the princess, blushing even more and giving him a letter. - Third, I said, the third - briefly called the prince, pushing the letter, and, leaning on the table, pulled a notebook with drawings of geometry. - Well, ma'am, - began the old man, crouching close to the daughter of the notebook and one hand on the back of the chair on which sat the princess so that the princess felt on all sides by the tobacco and old-pungent smell of his father, which she recently I know. - Well, madam, these triangles are similar; you see, the angle abc ... Princess anxiously glanced at the close of her brilliant father's eyes; red spots sparkled on her face, and it was evident that she did not understand anything and is so afraid of that fear stop her understand all further interpretation of his father, as if they were clear. Blame if a teacher or a fault was a pupil, but every day was repeated the same thing: at the Princess mutilos in her eyes, she saw nothing, heard, only felt close beside her dry face strict father, felt his breath and smell and just thought how would it go quickly out of the office and at home in the open to understand the problem. The old man came out of himself with a crash pushes and pulls the chair on which he sat, he makes an effort not to get hot, and almost every time heatedly, cursing, and sometimes threw a notebook. Princess wrong answer. - Well, do not fool! - cried the prince, pushing the notebook and quickly turned away, but immediately got up and walked, touched his hands to the princess hair and sat down again. He moved closer and continued to interpretation. - It is impossible, Princess, can not, - he said, when the princess, taking a notebook and closed with predetermined learned, was already preparing to leave, - mathematics great thing, my madam. And to you was like our silly ladies, I do not want. Endure-slyubitsya. - He patted her hand on the cheek. - Dur will pop out of your head. She wanted to leave, he stopped her with a gesture and took a new uncut book from the high table. - Here are some key tainstvatebe your Heloise sends. Religious. And I have faith in someone not interfere ... I looked. Take it. Well, go, go! He patted her on the shoulder and he locked the door behind her. Princess Mary returned to her room with a sad, scared expression that rarely left her and made her ugly, sickly face even more ugly, sat down at his desk laden with miniature portraits and littered with notebooks and books. The princess was as messy as her father was decent. She put the book geometry and eagerly opened the letter. The letter was from the closest childhood friend of Princess; this one was the same Karagin Julie, who was at a birthday party at the Rostovs: Julie wrote: «Chere et excellente amie, quelle chose terrible et effrayante que l'absence! J'ai beau me dire que la moitie de mon existence et de mon bonheur est en vous, que malgre la distance qui nous separe, nos coeurs sont unis par des liens indissolubles; le mien se revolte contre la destinee, et je ne puis, malgre les plaisirs et les distractions qui m'entourent, vaincre une certaine tristesse cachee que je ressens au fond du coeur depuis notre separation. Pourquoi ne sommes-nous pas reunies, comme cet ete dans votre grand cabinet sur le canape bleu, le canape a confidences? Pourquoi ne puis-je, comme il ya trois mois, puiser de nouvelles forces morales dans votre regard si doux, si calme et si penetrant, regard que j'aimais tant et que je crois voir devant moi, quand je vous ecris ». [Dear and precious friend, how terrible and awful thing is separation! No matter how often tell myself that half my existence and my happiness to you that, in spite of the distance that we have put asunder, our hearts are connected by unbreakable ties of my heart rebels against fate, and despite the fun and scattering around me, I I can not suppress a certain latent sadness that experience in my heart since our separation. Why we are not together, as in the past summer, in your big study, on a blue couch, on the couch "confession"? Why can not I as three months ago, which drew new moral force in your view, are the meek, quiet and insight, which I loved so much and which I see before me at the moment as I write to you? ] Having read this far, Princess Mary sighed, and looked in the mirror that stood to the right of it. The mirror reflected the ugly body weak and thin face. The eyes are always sad, and now especially hopelessly looked at myself in the mirror. "It flatters me," thought the princess, turned away and continued to read. Julie, however, is not flattered by his friend really, and the eyes of the princess, big, deep and radiant (as if the warm rays of light sometimes sheaves out of them) were so good that very often, in spite of the ugliness of the whole face, those eyes made attractive beauty. But the princess had never seen a good expression of his eyes, the expression of which they took in those moments when she was not thinking about himself. Like all people, her face took on tightly-unnatural, evil expression, as soon as she looked in the mirror. She continued to read: 211 «Tout Moscou ne parle que guerre. L'un de mes deux freres est deja a l'etranger, l'autre est avec la garde, qui se met en Marieche vers la frontiere. Notre cher empereur a quitte Petersbourg et, a ce qu'on pretend, compte lui-meme exposer sa precieuse existence aux chances de la guerre. Du veuille que le monstre corsicain, qui detruit le repos de l'Europe, soit terrasse par l'ange que le Tout-Ruissant, dans Sa misericorde, nous a donnee pour souverain. Sans parler de mes freres, cette guerre m'a privee d'une relation des plus cheres a mon coeur. Je parle du jeune Nicolas Rostoff, qui avec son enthousiasme n'a pu supporter l'inaction et a quitte l'universite pour aller s'enroler dans l'armee. Eh bien, chere Marieie, je vous avouerai, que, malgre son extreme jeunesse, son depart pour l'armee a ete un grand chagrin pour moi. Le jeune homme, dont je vous parlais cet ete, a tant de noblesse, de veritable jeunesse qu'on rencontre si rarement dans le siecle ou nous vivons parmi nos villards de vingt ans. Il a surtout tant de franchise et de coeur. Il est tellement pur et poetique, que mes relations avec lui, quelque passageres qu'elles fussent, ont ete l'une des plus douees jouissances de mon pauvre coeur, qui a deja tant souffert. Je vous raconterai un jour nos adieux et tout ce qui s'est dit en partant. Tout cela est encore trop frais. Ah! chere amie, vous etes heureuse de ne pas connaitre ces jouissances et ces peines si poignantes. Vous etes heureuse, puisque les derienieres sont ordinairement les plus fortes! Je sais fort bien, que le comte Nicolas est trop jeune pour pouvoir jamais devenir pour moi quelque chose de plus qu'un ami, mais cette douee amitie, ces relations si poetiques et si pures ont ete un besoin pour mon coeur. Mais n'en parlons plus. La grande nouvelle du jour qui occupe tout Moscou est la mort du vieux comte earless et son heritage. Figurez-vous que les trois princesses n'ont recu que tres peu de chose, le prince Basile rien, est que c'est M. Pierre qui a tout herite, et qui par-dessus le Marieche a ete reconnu pour fils legitime, par consequent comte Bezukhov est possesseur de la plus belle fortune de la Russie. On pretend que le prince Basile a joue un tres vilain role dans toute cette histoire et qu'il est reparti tout penaud pour Petersbourg. «Je vous avoue, que je comprends tres peu toutes ces affaires de legs et de testament; ce que je sais, c'est que depuis que le jeune homme que nous connaissions tous sous le nom de M. Pierre les tout court est devenu comte earless et possesseur de l'une des plus grandes fortunes de la Russie, je m'amuse fort a observer les changements de ton et des manieres des mamans accablees de filles a Marieier et des demoiselles elles-memes a l'egard de cet individu, qui, par parenthese, m'a paru toujours etre un pauvre, sire. Comme on s'amuse depuis deux ans a me donner des promis que je ne connais pas le plus souvent, la chronique matrimoniale de Moscou me fait comtesse earless. Mais vous sentez bien que je ne me souc nullement de le devenir. A propos de Marieiage, savez-vous que tout derienierement la tante en generalAnna M., m'a confie sous le sceau du plus grand secret un projet de Marieiage pour vous. Ce n'est ni plus, ni moins, que le fils du prince Basile, Anatole, qu'on voudrait ranger en le Marieiant a une personne riche et distinguee, et c'est sur vous qu'est tombe le choix des parents. Je ne sais comment vous envisagerez la chose, mais j'ai cru de mon devoir de vous en avertir. On le dit tres beau et tres mauvais sujet; c'est tout ce que j'ai pu savoir sur son compte. «Mais assez de bavardage comme cela. Je finis mon second feuillet, et maman me fait chercher pour aller diner chez les Apraksines. Lisez le livre mystique que je vous envoie et qui fait fureur chez nous. Quoiqu'il y ait des choses dans ce livre difficiles a atteindre avec la faible conception humaine, c'est un livre admirable dont la lecture calme et eleve l'ame. Adieu. Mes respects a monsieur votre pere et mes compliments a m-elle Bourienne. Je vous embrasse comme je vous aime. Julie ». «PSDonnez-moi des nouvelles de votre frere et de sa charmante petite femme». [All Moscow is talking about the war. One of my two brothers is already abroad, the other with a guard, which stands in the trek to the border. Our dear sire leaves St. Petersburg and is presumed to be going to expose myself your precious existence of an accidental war. God grant that the Corsican monster that disturbs the tranquility of Europe, was overthrown angel which the Almighty, in His goodness has put over us master. Not to mention my brothers, this war has deprived me of one of the relationships closest to my heart. I'm talking about young Nicholas Rostov; that is, when his enthusiasm could not tolerate inaction and left the university to join the army. I confess to you, my dear Marie, that in spite of his extreme youth, his departure to the army was a great grief to me. you send me and which makes so much noise you. However, since you tell me that it between the many good things there are those who can not find a weak human mind, it seems to me unnecessary to deal with confusing reading, that on this very might not bring any benefit. I could never understand the passion that some persons have, confuse yourself thinking pristraschayas to mystical books which excite only doubt in their minds, irritate their imagination and give them the character of exaggeration, it is a nasty Christian simplicity. We will read the best of the Apostles and the Gospel. We will not try to get that in these books there is a mysterious, because how can we, miserable sinners, know the terrible and holy secrets of Providence, as long as the wear on itself the carnal shell, which builds up between us and the Eternal impenetrable veil? We restrict ourselves to a better study of the great rules which our divine Savior has left us for our guidance here on earth; we will try to follow them and try to make sure that the less we will give revelry our mind, so we will be pleasing to God, who rejects all knowledge that comes not from Him, and that the less we delve into what he was pleased to conceal from us, the sooner he will give us this discovery His divine reason. The father did not tell me anything about the groom, but only said that he had received a letter and waiting for a visit of Prince Vasili; with regard to marriage, a plan for me, I tell you, my dear and precious friend, that marriage, in my opinion, there is a divine institution, which must be obeyed. Whatever it was hard for me, but if the Almighty will be pleased to impose upon me as wife and mother, I will try to fulfill them as faithfully as I can, without having to worry about studying their feelings as to whom he will give me the spouse. I received a letter from my brother, which I announced his arrival with his wife in Bald Hills. Joy, this will not last long, as he leaves us to take part in the war in which we are involved, God knows how, and why. Not only do you in the center of affairs, and the world, but here, among these field operations, and this silence, which the townspeople used to represent yourself in the village, echoes of war could be heard and make themselves hard to feel. My father only says that the campaigns and transitions, which I do not understand, and the third day, doing my usual walk along the village street, I saw heartrending scene. It was the party of recruits, we recruited and sent to the army. You should have seen the state in which there were mothers, wives and children of those who were leaving, and hear the sobs of both. I think that humanity has forgotten the laws of your Divine Savior, who taught us to love and forgive offenses, and that it considers its main advantage in the art of killing each other. Farewell, dear and good friend. May God preserve you, our divine Savior and his Blessed Mother under His holy and powerful cover. Maria. ] - Ah, vous expediez le courier, princesse, moi j'ai deja expedie le mien. J'ai ecris and ma pauvre mere, [A, you send a letter, I do send your. I wrote to my poor mother] - spoke quickly, pleasant, mellow voice, smiling m-lle Bourienne, lisping on When bringing with them in a concentrated, sad and gloomy atmosphere of Princess Mary's completely different, lightly-cheerful and complacent world. - Princesse, il faut que je vous previenne, - she added, lowering his voice, - le prince a eu une altercation, - altercation, - she said, especially grassiruya and enjoy listening to themselves, - une altercation avec Michel Ivanoff. Il est de tres mauvaise humeur, tres morose. Soyez prevenue, vous savez ... [I must warn you, princess, the prince quarreled with Mikhailo Ivanovich. He very much in the spirit of such gloomy. I warn you, you know ...] - Ah l chere amie, - answered Princess Mary, - je vous ai prie de ne jamais me prevenir de l'humeur dans laquelle se trouve mon pere. Je ne me permets pas de le juger, et je ne voudrais pas que les autres le fassent. [Oh, my dear friend! I asked you never to speak to me, in what mood my father. I will not allow myself to judge him and would not have wished that others judged. ] The Princess looked at the clock and noticed that it was already five minutes missed the time that should have been used to play on the clavichord, a frightened look went into the sitting room. Between 12 and 2 hours, according to the established order of the day, the prince rested and the princess played the clavichord. XXVI The gray-haired valet was sitting, dozing and listening to the snoring of the prince in the great room. From the far side of the house, because of the closed doors, heard twenty times repeated the difficult passages Dyussekovoy sonatas. At this time, I drove up to the steps of the carriage and the chaise, and went out of the carriage, Prince Andrew, dropped his little wife and let her go ahead. Tikhon gray-haired, wearing a wig, leaning out of the door ofitsiantskoy, whisper reported that Prince repose, and quickly closed the door. Tikhon knew that neither the arrival of a son, and no extraordinary events should not disturb the order of the day. Prince Andrew apparently knew this as well as Tikhon; He looked at his watch as if to believe, whether father habits for a while did not change, in which he had not seen it, and making sure that they have not changed, he turned to his wife - he stands up in twenty minutes. Let's go to the Princess Mary, - he said. Little Princess stouter during this time, but his eyes and a short lip with a mustache and a smile rose as much fun and cute when she spoke. - Mais c'est un palais, - she said to her husband, looking around with the expression with which say praise the owner of the ball. -! Allons, vite, vite ... [Yes, it's a palace! - Let's go faster, faster ...] - It is looking, smiling and Tikhon, and her husband, and the waiter followed them. - C'est Marieie qui s'exerce? Allons doucement, il faut la surprendre. [This Marie exercising? Hush, stun her by surprise. ] Prince Andrew followed her with a courteous and sad expression. - You're older, Tikhon, - he said, passing the old man, and kissed his hand. Before the room, where he heard the clavichord, the side door popped pretty blond Frenchwoman. M-lle Bourienne seemed mad with delight. - Ah! quel bonheur pour la princesse, - she said. - Enfin! Il faut que je la previenne. [Oh, what joy for the Princess! Finally! It is necessary to warn her. ] - Non, non, de grace ... Vous etes m-lle Bourienne, je vous connais deja par l'amitie que vous rorte ma belle-soeur, - said the princess, with a French kissing. - Elle ne nous attend ras? [No, no, please ... You are Mademoiselle Burien; I was already familiar with you for the friendship, what is to you, my daughter. She does not expect of us? ] They came to the door of the sitting room, from which I have heard again and again repeated passage. Prince Andrew stopped and frowned, as if expecting something unpleasant. The princess entered. Passage broke off in the middle; came the cry, heavy feet Princess Mary and kissing sounds. When Prince Andrew entered, the princess and the princess, once seen each other for a short time in the time of the wedding of Prince Andrew, wrapped his arms tightly pressed lips to those places, which were in the first minute. M-lle Bourienne stood beside them, pressed his hands to his heart and smiling devoutly, apparently as much ready to cry much and laugh. Prince Andrew shrugged and made a face like frown music lovers to hear a false note. Both women let go of each other; then again, as if afraid of being late, grabbed each other's hands, they began to kiss and take your hands and then again began to kiss each other in the face, and quite unexpectedly, Prince Andrew, both cry and kiss began again. M-lle Bourienne wept too. Prince Andrew was obviously embarrassed; but the two women seemed so natural, that they cried; it seemed they did not anticipate that would otherwise take place this meeting. - Ah! chere! ... Ah! Marieie ... -! Suddenly the two women talked and laughed. - J'ai reve sette nuit ... - Vous ne nous attendez donc pas ... Ah?! Marieie, vous avez maigri ... - Et vous avez repris ... [Oh, dear ... Oh, Marie ... -! I saw in a dream. - So you did not expect us ... Oh, Mary, you've lost weight?. - And you've filled out ...] - J'ai tout de suite reconnu madame la princesse, [I immediately recognized Princess] - put m-lle Burien. - Et moi qui ne me doutais pas ... -! Exclaimed Princess Mary. - Ah! Andre, je ne vous voyais pas. [And I had no idea! ... Oh, Andre, I have not seen you. ] Prince Andrew kissed his sister's hand in hand, and told her that it is the same pleurienicheuse, [crybaby] as always has been. Princess Mary turned to her brother, and through the tears of love, warm and gentle look in her fine at the moment, large radiant eyes focused on the face of Prince Andrew. The princess talked incessantly. Short upper lip with a mustache and then briefly flew down pritrogivalas, where needed, to the golden lower jaw, and reopened his eyes gleaming teeth and smile. The princess told the case, who was with them at the Savior's woe, threatened her with the danger in her position, and immediately thereafter reported that she dresses her left St. Petersburg and here will go God knows what, and that Andrew is quite changed, and that but let's talk about it after the Kitty Odyntsova married an old man, and that is the bridegroom for Princess Mary pour tout de bon, [very serious]. Princess Mary still stared at his brother, and it was a beautiful sight and the love and sadness. It was evident that it is now established its own line of thought, independent of the bride speeches. She's in the middle of her story about the last festival in St. Petersburg, turned to his brother: - And you're going to fight resolutely, Andre? - said oia, sighing. Lise shuddered too. - even tomorrow - is responsible brother. - II m'abandonne ici, et Du sait pourquoi, quand il aur pu avoir de l'avancement ... [He leaves me here, and God knows what, while he could get a raise ...] Princess Mary did not listen and continued to thread his thoughts turned to the daughter, friendly eyes pointing at her belly: - Probably? - she said. Face Princess changed. She sighed. - Yes, probably - she said. - Ah! This is a very scary ... Sponge Lisa dropped. She is bringing her face-to-face in-law, and suddenly began to cry again. - She needs to rest - Prince Andrew, frowning said. - Do not know, Lisa is not it? Reducing it to myself, and I will go to my father. That he, all the same? - The same, the same; I do not know how on your eyes - Princess replied happily. - And the same hours, and a walk through the alleys? Machine? - I asked Prince Andrew with a scarcely perceptible smile, show that despite his love and respect for his father, he understood his weakness. - the same hours and the machine, even mathematics and my geometry lessons - happily answered Princess Mary, as if her lessons in geometry were one of the most joyful experiences of her life. When passed those twenty minutes that were needed for the rising period of the old prince, Tikhon came to call the young prince to his father. The old man made an exception in his way of life in honor of his son: he ordered to let him into his half of the time of dressing before dinner. The prince walked through the old-fashioned way, in a coat and powder. And while Prince Andrew (not so peevish expression on his face and manners, which he unleashes on his living room, but with the busy person that he was when he was talking with Pierre) went in to his father, an old man was sitting in the dressing room on a wide, morocco upholstered, chair in pudromante, giving his head hands Tikhon. - BUT! Warrior! Bonaparte to conquer you want? - said the old man, shaking his powdered head as it is allowed to plait braid, which was in the hands of Tikhon. - take him even though you are well, and that he and commercials soon we will record their subjects. - Wow! - He put his cheek. The old man was in good spirits after preprandial sleep. (He said that after lunch silver sleep, and before dinner, golden.) He happily from under his thick bushy eyebrows looked askance at his son. Prince Andrew came up and kissed his father at a specified place for them. He did not respond to his father's favorite topic of conversation - banter over the present military men and especially over Bonaparte. - Yes, come to you, Father, and with his pregnant wife, - said Prince Andrew, watching lively and respectful eyes the movement of each feature his father's face. - How is your health? - Unhealthy, brother, there are only fools and libertines, and you know me, from dawn to dusk busy refrain, well and healthy. - Thank God - the son said, smiling. - God has nothing to do with. Well, tell me - he said, returning to his favorite ridge - as you Germans with Bonaparte to fight for your new science strategy called, taught. Prince Andrew smiled. - Allow time to recover, sir, - he said with a smile, shows that the weakness of the father did not prevent him to respect and love him. - Because I have not located. - You're lying, - cried the old man, shaking his braids to try if it was tightly braided, and grabbing her son by the hand. - house for your wife is ready. Princess Mary will bring it and show and naboltal with three boxes. It is their Indian business. I'm glad it. Sit down, tell me. Michelson army I understand Tolstoy's too ... a one-time landing ... southern army will do what? Prussia, neutral ... I know that. Austria that? - he said, getting up from his chair and walking across the room to run around and serve a piece of clothing Tikhon. - Sweden that? As Pomerania pass? Prince Andrew, seeing the urgency of his father's demands, initially reluctant, but then more and more animated and involuntarily, in the middle of the story, out of habit, going from Russian into French, began to explain the proposed operational plan of campaign. He described how the ninety thousandth army was to threaten Prussia to bring it out of neutrality and be drawn into the war, as part of these troops was in Stralsund connect with Swedish troops as two hundred and twenty thousand Austrians, in conjunction with a hundred thousand Russian, had to act in Italy and on the Rhine, and as the Russian and fifty thousand and fifty thousand Englishmen landed in Naples and as a result five hundred thousandth army had with the different parties to make an attack on the French. The old prince did not show the slightest interest when the story as if he had not listened to, and continuing on the course to dress three times unexpectedly interrupted him. Once he stopped him and shouted: - White! white! This meant that Tikhon handed him the wrong waistcoat he wanted. Another time he stopped and asked: - And soon she will give birth? - and reproachfully shaking his head, he said: - It is not good! Go on, go on. The third time, when Prince Andrew was finishing the description of the old man sang false and old voice: «Malbroug s'en va-t-en guerre. Dieu sait guand reviendra ». [Marlbrough s'en va-t-en guerre. God knows when I will return. ] Son just smiled. - I'm not saying that it was a plan I approve of, - he said the son, - I have just said, that is. Napoleon made his plan is not worse than that. - Well, you're the newcomer did not tell me anything. - And the old man mused to himself hurriedly: - Dieu sait quand reviendra. - Go into the Dining Room. XXVII At the appointed hour, powdered and shaven, the prince came to the dining room where awaited him the daughter, Princess Mary, m-lle Burien and the architect of the prince, by a strange whim it permissible to the table, though its position little man that he could not rely on such an honor. Prince, held firmly in the life of social status and are rarely admitted to the table, even the important provincial officials, all of a sudden on the architect Mihail Ivanovich, blow your nose in a corner in checkered scarf, argued that all people are equal, and more than once inspired his daughter that Mikhailo Ivanovich nothing worse than we are with you. At the table, the Prince often turned to dumb Mikhailo Ivanovich. In the dining room, a huge-high, like all the rooms in the house, is expected to yield Prince home and waiters stood behind each chair; butler, napkin on his arm, looked around serving, blinking lackeys and constantly darting uneasy glances from wall clocks to the door, from which was supposed to be the prince. Prince Andrew looked at the huge, new to him, gold frame with the image of the princes of the family tree Bolkonskis hanging in front of a huge frame with a badly-made (probably by the hand of the home of the painter) depicting the sovereign prince in the crown, which was supposed to take place from Rurik and be the ancestor of the genus Bolkonskis. Prince Andrew looked at this family tree, shaking his head and laughing with the view to look at how ridiculously similar portrait. - How do I know it all here! - he said to Princess Mary, approached him. Princess Mary looked with surprise at his brother. She did not understand why he was smiling. Everything made her father aroused in her a reverence that is non-negotiable. - Everyone has his Achilles heel - continued Prince Andrew. - With its huge mind donner dans ce ridicule! [Succumb to this pettiness! ] Princess Mary could not understand the courage and judgment of his brother was preparing his mind as he heard of his office expected steps: Prince entered the fast, fun, and he always walked as if deliberately presenting his hasty manner opposed to the strict order of the house. At the same moment, a large clock struck two, and in a thin voice echoed others in the living room. The prince stopped; from beneath bushy eyebrows hanging lively, brilliant, stern eyes looked around and settled on a young princess. The young princess felt at the time that feeling, experiencing a royal court at the outlet, the feeling of fear and reverence, which aroused the old man all close. He stroked the Princess on the head and then the awkward movement patted her on the head. - she said, trembling with emotion, with a solemn gesture, holding in both hands in front of his brother oval old scapular Savior with a black face in a silver chasuble on a silver chain of small works. She crossed herself, kissed the scapular and handed it to Andrew. - Please, Andre, for me ... From her large eyes shone with a kind and timid rays of light. those eyes lit up all the painful, thin face and made it beautiful. Brother wanted to take the scapular, but she stopped him. Andrew understood, crossed himself and kissed the scapular. His face was at one and the same time, it gently (it was moved) and mocking. - Merci, mon ami. [Thank you my friend. ] She kissed his forehead and sat down again on the sofa. They were silent. - As I told you, Andre, be kind and generous, how you've always been. Do not judge strictly Lise, - she said. - She is so sweet, so good, and the position it is now very difficult. - I think I did not say anything to you, Mary, that I blamed in anything his wife or was dissatisfied with her. What are you telling me all this? Princess Mary flushed spots and silent, as if she felt guilty. - I did not say anything to you, and you say nothing. And it's sad. Red spots were even stronger on the forehead, cheeks, neck and Princess Mary. She wanted to say something and could not speak. Brother guessed: the little princess in the afternoon crying, saying that premonition unfortunate birth, their fears, and complained about his fate, to her father and her husband. After the tears she fell asleep. Prince Andrew was sorry for his sister. - Know one thing, Masha, I do what I can not reproach, did not reproach and never reproach my wife and myself in what I can only reproach in relation to it; and it always will be, in whatever circumstances I may be. But if you want to know the truth ... do you want to know if I'm happy? Not. Is it happy? Not. Why is this? I do not know ... he spoke, he stood up, walked over to her sister and, bending, kissed her on the forehead. His beautiful eyes were intelligent and kind, unusual brilliance, but he was not looking at her sister, and in the darkness of the open door, through her head. - Let's go for it, we must say goodbye. Or go alone, woke her up, and I'll be right there. Parsley! - He called the valet, - come here, get out. This seat is on the right side. Princess Mary got up and headed for the door. She stopped. - Andre, si vous avez. la foi, vous vous seriez adresse a Dieu, pour qu'il vous donne l'amour, que vous ne sentez pas et votre priere aurait ete exaucee. [If you had faith, you would have turned to God in prayer, that He has given you the love you feel and your prayer would be answered. ] - Yes, is not it! - said Prince Andrew. - Go, Mary, I'm coming. On the way to the room the sisters, in the gallery, connecting one house to another, Prince Andrew met a cute smile m-lle Bourienne, for the third time in the day with enthusiastic and naive smile came across him in solitary transitions. - Ah! je vous croyais chez vous, [Oh, I thought you were at home,] - she said, for some reason blushing and lowering her eyes. Prince Andrew looked at her sternly. On the face of Prince Andrew suddenly expressed anger. He said nothing to her, but looked at her forehead and hair, not looking in his eyes, so contemptuous that the Frenchwoman blushed and walked away without saying anything. When he came to the room's sister, the Princess was awake and her merry voice, hurrying one word after the other, he came from the open door. She spoke as if after a long abstinence she wanted to reward for lost time. - Non, mais figurez-vous, la vieille comtesse Zouboff avec de fausses boucles et la bouche pleine de fausses dents, comme si elle voulait defier les annees ... [No, imagine the old Countess Zubova, with false curls, with false teeth as though mocking the years ...] Xa, xa, xa, Marieie! Exactly the same phrase about Countess Zubova same laughter already heard five times in front of strangers Prince Andrew from his wife. He quietly entered the room. The princess, plump and rosy, with the work in hand, sitting on a chair and talked incessantly, touching Petersburg reminiscences and even phrases. Prince Andrew came up, stroked her hair and asked her if she had a rest from the road. She said, and continued the same conversation. by six carriage stood at the door. In the courtyard was a dark autumn night. The driver did not see the drawbar strollers. On the porch were busy people with lanterns. Huge house fires burned through its large windows. In the front yard were crowded, who wanted to say goodbye to the young prince; in the hall were all homemade: Mikhail Ivanovich, m-lle Bourienne, Princess Mary and Princess. Prince Andrew was summoned to the office of his father, who, eye-to-eye wanted to say goodbye to him. Everyone was waiting for their exit. When Prince Andrew entered the room, the old Duke inold man's glasses and his white robe in which he was not accepted, but the son, sitting at a desk and writing. He looked around. - Going? - And again he began to write. - I came to say goodbye. - Kiss here, - he showed his cheek, - Thank you, thank you! - What do you thank me for? - Because not overstay for babyu skirt is not holding. Service first and foremost. Thanks! - And he continued to write, so that the spray flew to splutter of the pen. - If you need to say, say it. These two things can do together, - he added. - About my wife ... I and so ashamed that I'll leave her in his arms ... - What lie? Say what you need. - When the wife will give birth to time, send to Moscow for an obstetrician ... That he was here. The old prince stopped, as if not understanding, looked stern eyes on his son. - I know that one can not help, if nature does not help, - said Prince Andrew, apparently embarrassed. - I agree that in a million cases, one is unfortunate, but it is my fantasy. She uttered, she saw in a dream, and she was afraid. - Um ... um ... - said to himself, the old prince, continuing to build upon. - I'll do. He rascherknul signature suddenly turned quickly to his son, and he laughed. - Too bad, eh? - What is bad, sir? - My wife! - briefly and significantly said the old prince. - I do not understand - said Prince Andrew. - There's nothing to do, my friend, - he said the prince, - they are not razzhenishsya. Do not be afraid; I will not tell anyone; as you know yourself. He grabbed his hand in her bony small brush, shook it, looked straight into the face of his son with their quick eyes that seemed to see right through a man, and again laughed his cold laughter. Son sighed, admitting that sigh that his father knew. The old man continued to fold and print letters, with his habitual rapidity, grasping and throwing wax, printing and paper. - What to do? Beautiful! I'll do everything. You be at peace - he said abruptly during printing. Andrew was silent, and it was pleasant and unpleasant, that his father understood him. The old man stood up and gave a letter to his son. - Listen, - he said - do not take care of his wife, it is possible to do something will be done. Now listen: a letter Mihailo Ilarionovichu give. I am writing to you he is in a good location for a long time and used the aide did not hold: a bad position! Say, did you tell him that I remember him and love. Yes, write how he will take you. If good will, let him. Nikolai Andreyevich Bolkonsky son of mercy serve no one will. Well, now come here. He spoke with such a tongue twister that did not finish half the words, but the son was accustomed to understand it. He took his son to a desk, flipped it open, opened a drawer and took out a scrawled his big, long and compressed handwriting notebook. - It must have been me to die before you. Know, then my notes, and their sovereign pass after my death. Now, here - here's Lombard ticket and a letter: this prize to the person who will write the history of Suvorov's wars. Forward to the academy. Here are my remarks, when I read it for yourself, you will find useful. Andrew did not tell his father that is true, he will live for a long time. He understood that to say this is not necessary. - Everything will perform, sir, - he said. - Well, now goodbye! - He gave his son to kiss his hand and embraced him. - Remember one thing, Prince Andrew: if they kill you, I will hurt an old man ... - He suddenly broke off and suddenly shrill voice continued: - And if I find out that you have not behaved like a son of Nicholas Bolkonsky, I would be ... a shame! - he screamed. - That you could not tell me, sir, - smiling son said. The old man paused. - I also wanted to ask you - continued Prince Andrew, - if they kill me, and if I have a son, do not let him off, as I said yesterday, that he grew up in you ... please. - His wife does not give? - the old man said, and laughed. They stood silently against each other. Quick old man's eyes were fixed straight into the eyes of his son. Something twitched in the lower part of the old prince's face. - Just ... go! - he said suddenly. - Go on! - he cried, angry and loud voice, opening the cabinet door. - What is that? - asked the princess, and the princess, seeing Prince Andrew, and for a moment leaning figure shouting angrily old man in a white robe, without a wig and old man's glasses. Prince Andrew sighed and made no reply. - Well, - he said, turning to his wife. And it is "well" was cold sneer as if he was saying: "Now you are doing your stuff." - Andre, deja! [Andrew, already! ] - said the little princess, turning pale with fear, and looking at her husband. He put his arm around her. She screamed and fell unconscious on his shoulder. He gently took her shoulder, on which she was lying, looked into her face and gently put it on the chair. - Adieu, Marieie, [Goodbye, Masha] - he said softly, his sister, kissed her hand in hand with rapid steps and left the room. Princess was in the chair, m-lle Burien rubbing her temples. Princess Mary, daughter-supporting, with tearful beautiful eyes, still staring at the door through which Prince Andrew went out, and he baptized him. Out of the office could be heard as shots, frequently repeated sounds angry old man blowing your nose. Just-released Prince Andrew, the study door opened quickly and looked stern figure of the old man in a white coat. - Gone? Well and good! - he said, looking angrily at the unconscious little princess, shook his head, and slammed the door. PART I BTORAYA In October 1805, Russian troops occupied the villages and towns of the Austrian Grand Duchy, and even new shelves came from Russia and burdening quartered residents, located in the fortress of Braunau. In Braunau was the headquarters of Kutuzov commander in chief. 11th October 1805 one of the only things come to Braunau infantry regiments, waiting for the show in-chief, I was half a mile from the city. Despite the non-Russian countryside and environment (fruit gardens, stone walls, tiled roofs, the mountains that came into the distance), on the non-Russian peoples, c curiously looked at the soldiers, the regiment had exactly the same form which had any Russian regiment was preparing to Look somewhere somewhere in the middle of Russia. In the evening, on the last step, an order was received that the commander in chief will be watching the regiment on the march. Although the order of the words, and seem obscure regimental commander, and the question arose as to understand the order of words in the form of a camp or not? the board of battalion commanders decided to submit Regiment in dress uniform on the grounds that it is always better pereklanyatsya than not doklanyatsya. And the soldiers, after tridtsativerstnogo transition, did not close our eyes all night were repaired, cleaned; adjutants and company hoped deducted; and in the morning the regiment, instead of stretched disorderly crowd, as he had been on the eve of the last transition, represented by a coherent mass of 2 000 people, each of whom knew his place, his job, and of which each one Buttons and strap are in place and gleaming cleanliness . Not only the exterior was fine, but if you like to have been the commander in chief to look under their uniforms, then he saw on each would be equally clean shirt, and in each knapsack would find institutionalized a number of things, "awl and myltse," as the soldiers say. There was only one thing, about which no one could be calm. It was the shoes. More than half of the people were broken boots. But the lack of this is not from fault of the regimental commander, as despite repeated requests, he was not released them from the Austrian authorities, and the regiment was a thousand miles away. The regimental commander was an elderly, choleric, with graying eyebrows and sideburns general, thick and wide more from chest to back than from one shoulder to the other. He was wearing a brand-new, from the folds of his uniform packed and thick gold epaulettes which seemed not downward and upward raised his fat shoulders. The colonel had the kind of person happily make one of the most solemn affairs of life. He walked about in front of the front and pohazhivaya, trembling at every step, slightly bending his back. Evident was that the regimental commander admired his regiment, he is happy that his spiritual forces occupied only a regiment; but, despite his twitching gait as if saying that, in addition to military interests, in his heart and a considerable place is occupied by the interests of the public life and female. - Well, Father Michael Mitrich, - he said to one battalion (battalion commander leaned forward, smiling; it was evident that they were happy), - we got to nuts tonight. However, it seems that nothing, not a regiment of evil ... And? Battalion commander realized cheerful irony and laughed. - And on the Empress meadow with field would not banished. - What? - the commander said. At this time, on the way from the city, on which were placed mahalnye, shows two saddle. It was an adjutant and a Cossack riding behind. The adjutant was sent from the Main Staff of the colonel confirm what has been said it is not clear in yesterday's order, namely, that the commander in chief wished to see the regiment was in exactly the position in which the OH was - in uniforms, in their cases, and without any preparation. Kutuzov member Hofkriegsrat from Vienna on the eve arrived, with suggestions and demands to go as soon as possible to join up with the army of Archduke Ferdinand and Mack, and Kutuzov, not considering profitable this connection, among other evidence in favor of his opinion intended to show the Austrian general the sad state in which the troops would come from Russia. With this object he wanted to go to meet the shelf, so that it would be worse than the position of the shelf, the more pleasant it would be commander in chief. While the adjutant did not know these details, however he handed the regimental commander in chief an indispensable requirement that the people were in coats and blankets, and otherwise in-chief will be unhappy. After hearing these words, the regimental commander hung his head, silently shrugged his shoulders and his arms choleric gesture. - I have done things! - he said. - Here I tell you the same, Mikhailo Mitrich that campaign, so in their cloaks, - he said reproachfully to the battalion commander. - Oh, my God! - he added, and resolutely stepped forward. - company commanders of the Lord! - he shouted a voice, familiar to the team. - Feldwebel ... Soon there perhaps? - he said to the adjutant, who had come with an expression of respectful politeness evidently refers to a person, about which he spoke. - In an hour, I think. - We have time to change clothes? - I do not know, General ... The regimental commander, he came to the series, ordered a quick change back into his overcoat. Company commanders ran into companies, sergeants major fuss (overcoat were not quite serviceable) and at the same moment, swayed, stretched and talk buzzed above right, silent foursquare. On all sides they ran off and ran up the soldiers, tossed back shoulder, over his head dragged bags, removed his overcoat and, raising his hands high, pulled up their sleeves. Half an hour later everything will come to the old order, only foursquare became gray from black. The regimental commander, again twitch gait, she stepped forward shelf and looked at him from afar. - What's that? What's this! - he shouted, pausing. - Commander of the 3rd Company! .. - The commander of the 3rd Company to General! commander to the general, the third company to the commander ... - I heard voices through the ranks, and the adjutant ran to look for sluggish officer. When the sounds of fervent voices, distorting, screaming already, "the general in the 3rd company," came to the destination, the required officer appeared from behind a company and, although people already elderly and had no habit to run, awkwardly clutching socks, trotting toward the general. captain's face was anxious student who is told to tell them a lesson unlearned. On the red (obviously from intemperance) nose were spots and mouth do not find a position. The regimental commander from head to toe examined the captain, while he was coming out of breath, as the restraining step approach. - You'll soon people in sundresses outfit! What's this? - shouted the regimental commander, pushing the lower jaw and pointing in the ranks of the 3rd company of a soldier in an overcoat factory color cloth, different from other overcoats. - Sami where you are? Expected in-chief, and you go out of his place? Huh? ... I'll teach you how to inspect people in Cossack dress! ... Huh? ... The company commander, not taking his eyes off the chief, more and more he pressed his two fingers to his cap as if in this one pressed against it now saw their salvation . - Well, why are you silent? Who have you got there in the Hungarians dressed? - strictly joked regimental commander. - Your Excellency ... - Well, that "Your Excellency?" Your Excellency! Your Excellency! What Your Excellency - no one knows. - Your Excellency, it is Dolokhov, demoted ... - captain said softly. - What is he to field marshal, or something, demoted or soldiers? A soldier, so should be dressed all in form. - Your Excellency, you are allowed him to march. - Approved? Approved? Here you are always young people, - said the regimental commander cooling down somewhat. - Approved? You say anything, and you and ... - The colonel paused. - You say anything, and you, and ... - What? - he said, irritated again. - Very well dressed people decently ... And the colonel, looking at the adjutant, his shudders gait toward the shelf. It was evident that his annoyance himself liked him, and that he, walking up to the shelf, wanted to find another excuse his anger. Cutting off one officer for uncleaned sign, another for irregular rows, he went to the third company. - kaaak stand? Where the leg? Leg where? - shouted the regimental commander with a look of pain in his voice, even people in five short of Dolokhov, dressed in bluish overcoat. Dolokhov slowly straightened his bent leg and straight, his eyes bright and brazen, looked into the face of the general. - Why blue overcoat? Down ... Sergeant! To disguise it ... drya ... - He did not finish. - General, I am obliged to execute orders, but is not obliged to carry ... - hurriedly said Dolokhov. - In the front did not speak ... Do not talk, do not talk ... - Do not obliged to tolerate insults, - loud, resounding finish Dolokhov. His eyes met the general and the soldier. General paused, angrily pulling down tight scarf. - Very well change, I ask you - he said, walking away. II - Goes! - I cried at this time mahalny. The regimental commander, flushed, ran to the horse, with trembling hands took hold of the stirrup, swung body, recovered, drew his sword, and with a happy, determined face, the side with his mouth open, ready to cry. Polk started, how Recovering bird, and froze. - Smear-p-p-p-to! - shouted the regimental commander of the voice stunning soul happy for myself, strictly in relation to the shelf and friendly with respect to the boss pulls. The broad, tree-lined, large, besshosseynoy road, slightly rattling springs, trotting briskly rode high blue Viennese carriage tandem. For stroller galloping escort and convoy kroatov. Beside Kutuzov sat an Austrian general in the country, among the Russian black, white uniform. The carriage stopped at the regiment. Kutuzov and the Austrian general about something quietly talking and Kutuzov smiled slightly, while with heavy steps, he let down his leg from the step, just as if it was not those 2000 people who breathlessly watched him and the regimental commander. There was a cry of command, the regiment ringing faltered again, making on guard. In the dead silence came a faint voice in chief. Polk barked: "Good morning, your ho-ho-ho-ho-tion!" And everything stopped again. At first Kutuzov stood still while the regiment moved; then Kutuzov near the White generals, foot, accompanied by a retinue walked along the rows. By the way the regimental commander saluted the commander in chief, glaring in his eyes, stretching and picking up as tilted forward went for the generals in rows, barely holding the twitching movement, like jumping at every word and movement in chief - it was evident that he performed his duties slave with even greater pleasure than acting chief. Polk, thanks to the rigor and diligence of the regimental commander, was in excellent condition compared to others, comes at the same time to Braunau. Retarded and patients were only 217 people. And everything was fine, except for the shoes. Kutuzov walked through the rows, occasionally stopping and saying a few kind words to the officers, whom he had known in the Turkish war, and sometimes the soldiers. Looking at the shoes, several times he sadly shook his head and pointed at her Austrian general with an expression like that would not be blamed in this one, but could not see how bad it is. The regimental commander every time it ran forward, afraid to miss a word about the regiment commander in chief. Behind Kutuzov, at a distance, that every little spoken word could be heard, the man went 20 suites. Lord Formation talking between themselves and sometimes laughing. The closest of the commander in chief walked a handsome adjutant. It was Prince Bolkonsky. Beside him was his friend Nesvitski, high staff officer, extremely stout, with a kind and smiling beautiful face and watery eyes; Nesvitski barely keep from laughing, excited blackish hussar officer, who was walking beside him. "We have completely held together forces, close to 70,000 men to the enemy when he passirte the Lech, attack and beat can. We can, as we are masters of Ulm, the advantage also of two Uferien the Danube champion to stay, do not lose; therefore also any moment when the enemy does not passirte the Lech, the Danube translate, throw forward to his Communikations line, the Danube below repassiren and the enemy, if he wanted to turn against our faithful Allirte with all their might, alabald vereitelien his intention , We will, contrary to hope in such a way the moment when the Imperial-Ruseische will be Equipped army courageously, and then shared easily find the opportunity to prepare the enemy the fate he deserved. " [Мы имеем вполне сосредоточенные силы около, 70 000 человек, так что мы можем атаковать и разбить неприятеля в случае переправы его через Лех. Так как мы уже владеем Ульмом, то мы можем удерживать за собою выгоду командования обоими берегами Дуная, стало быть, ежеминутно, в случае если неприятель не перейдет через Лех, переправиться через Дунай, броситься на его коммуникационную линию, ниже перейти обратно Дунай и неприятелю, если он вздумает обратить всю свою силу на наших верных союзников, не дать исполнить его намерение. Таким образом мы будем бодро ожидать времени, когда императорская российская армия совсем изготовится, и затем вместе легко найдем возможность уготовить неприятелю участь, коей он заслуживает ". ] Кутузов тяжело вздохнул, окончив этот период, и внимательно и ласково посмотрел на члена гофкригсрата. - Но вы знаете, ваше превосходительство, мудрое правило, предписывающее предполагать худшее, - сказал австрийский генерал, видимо желая покончить с шутками и приступить к делу. Он невольно оглянулся на адъютанта. - Извините, генерал - перебил его Кутузов и тоже поворотился к князю Андрею. - Вот что, мой любезный, возьми ты все донесения от наших лазутчиков у Козловского. Вот два письма от графа Ностица, вот письмо от его высочества эрцгерцога Фердинанда, вот еще, - сказал он, подавая ему несколько бумаг. - И из всего этого чистенько, на французском языке, составь mеmorandum, записочку, для видимости всех тех известий, которые мы о действиях австрийской армии имели. Ну, так-то, и представь его превосходительству. Князь Андрей наклонил голову в знак того, что понял с первых слов не только то, что было сказано, но и то, что желал бы сказать ему Кутузов. Он собрал бумаги, и, отдав общий поклон, тихо шагая по ковру, вышел в приемную. Несмотря на то, что еще не много времени прошло с тех пор, как князь Андрей оставил Россию, он много изменился за это время. В выражении его лица, в движениях, в походке почти не было заметно прежнего притворства, усталости и лени; он имел вид человека, не имеющего времени думать о впечатлении, какое он производит на других, и занятого делом приятным и интересным. Лицо его выражало больше довольства собой и окружающими; улыбка и взгляд его были веселее и привлекательнее. Кутузов, которого он догнал еще в Польше, принял его очень ласково, обещал ему не забывать его, отличал от других адъютантов, брал с собою в Вену и давал более серьезные поручения. Из Вены Кутузов писал своему старому товарищу, отцу князя Андрея: "Ваш сын - писал он, - надежду подает быть офицером, из ряду выходящим по своим занятиям, твердости и исполнительности. Я считаю себя счастливым, имея под рукой такого подчиненного ". В штабе Кутузова, между товарищами-сослуживцами и вообще в армии князь Андрей, так же как и в петербургском обществе, имел две совершенно-противоположные репутации. Одни, меньшая часть, признавали князя Андрея чем-то особенным от себя и от всех других людей, ожидали от него больших успехов, слушали его, восхищались им и подражали ему; и с этими людьми князь Андрей был прост и приятен. Другие, большинство, не любили князя Андрея, считали его надутым, холодным и неприятным человеком. Но с этими людьми князь Андрей умел поставить себя так, что его уважали и даже боялись. Выйдя в приемную из кабинета Кутузова, князь Андрей с бумагами подошел к товарищу, дежурному адъютанту Козловскому, который с книгой сидел у окна. - Ну, что, князь? - спросил Козловский. - Приказано составить записку, почему нейдем вперед. - А почему? Князь Андрей пожал плечами. - Нет известия от Мака? - спросил Козловский. - Нет. - Ежели бы правда, что он разбит, так пришло бы известие. - Вероятно, - сказал князь Андрей и направился к выходной двери; но в то же время навстречу ему, хлопнув дверью, быстро вошел в приемную высокий, очевидно приезжий, австрийский генерал в сюртуке, с повязанною черным платком головой и с орденом Марии-Терезии на шее. Князь Андрей остановился. - Генерал-аншеф Кутузов? - быстро проговорил приезжий генерал с резким немецким выговором, оглядываясь на обе стороны и без остановки проходя к двери кабинета. - Генерал-аншеф занят, - сказал Козловский, торопливо подходя к неизвестному генералу и загораживая ему дорогу от двери. - Как прикажете доложить? Неизвестный генерал презрительно оглянулся сверху вниз на невысокого ростом Козловского, как будто удивляясь, что его могут не знать. - Генерал-аншеф занят - спокойно повторил Козловский. Лицо генерала нахмурилось, губы его дернулись и задрожали. Он вынул записную книжку, быстро начертил что-то карандашом, вырвал листок, отдал, быстрыми шагами подошел к окну, бросил свое тело на стул и оглянул бывших в комнате, будто как спрашивая: зачем они на него смотрят? Потом генерал поднял голову, вытянул шею, как будто намереваясь что-то сказать, но тотчас же, как будто небрежно начиная напевать про себя, произвел странный звук, который тотчас же пресекся. Дверь кабинета отворилась, и на пороге ее показался Кутузов. Генерал с повязанною головой, как будто убегая от опасности, нагнувшись, большими, быстрыми шагами худых ног подошел к Кутузову. - Vous le voyez malheureux Mack, [Вы видите несчастного Мака. ] - проговорил он сорвавшимся голосом. Лицо Кутузова, стоявшего в дверях кабинета, несколько мгновений оставалось совершенно неподвижно. Потом, как волна, пробежала по его лицу морщина, лоб разгладился; он почтительно наклонил голову, закрыл глаза, молча пропустил мимо себя Мака и сам за собой затворил дверь. Слух, уже распространенный прежде, о разбитии австрийцев и о сдаче всей армии под Ульмом, оказывался справедливым. Через полчаса уже по разным направлениям были разосланы адъютанты с приказаниями, доказывавшими, что скоро и русские войска, до сих пор бывшие в бездействии, должны будут встретиться с неприятелем. Князь Андрей был один из тех редких офицеров в штабе, который полагал свой главный интерес в общем ходе военного дела. Увидав Мака и услыхав подробности его погибели, он понял, что половина кампании проиграна, понял всю трудность положения русских войск и живо вообразил себе то, что ожидает армию, и ту роль, которую он должен будет играть в ней. Невольно он испытывал волнующее радостное чувство при мысли о посрамлении самонадеянной Австрии и о том, что через неделю, может быть, придется ему увидеть и принять участие в столкновении русских с французами, впервые после Суворова. Но он боялся гения Бонапарта, который мог оказаться сильнее всей храбрости русских войск, и вместе с тем не мог допустить позора для своего героя. Взволнованный и раздраженный этими мыслями, князь Андрей пошел в свою комнату, чтобы написать отцу, которому он писал каждый день. Он сошелся в коридоре с своим сожителем Несвицким и шутником Жерковым; они, как всегда, чему-то смеялись. - Что ты так мрачен? - спросил Несвицкий, заметив бледное с блестящими глазами лицо князя Андрея. - Веселиться нечему - отвечал Болконский. В то время как князь Андрей сошелся с Несвицким и Жерковым, с другой стороны коридора навстречу им шли Штраух, австрийский генерал, состоявший при штабе Кутузова для наблюдения за продовольствием русской армии, и член гофкригсрата, приехавшие накануне. По широкому коридору было достаточно места, чтобы генералы могли свободно разойтись с тремя офицерами; но Жерков, отталкивая рукой Несвицкого, запыхавшимся голосом проговорил: -! Идут идут ... ... посторонитесь, дорогу! пожалуйста дорогу! Генералы проходили с видом желания избавиться от утруждающих почестей. На лице шутника Жеркова выразилась вдруг глупая улыбка радости, которой он как будто не мог удержать. - Ваше превосходительство, - сказал он по-немецки, выдвигаясь вперед и обращаясь к австрийскому генералу. - Имею честь поздравить. Он наклонил голову и неловко, как дети, которые учатся танцовать, стал расшаркиваться то одной, то другой ногой. Генерал, член гофкригсрата, строго оглянулся на него; не заметив серьезность глупой улыбки, не мог отказать в минутном внимании. Он прищурился, показывая, что слушает. - Имею честь поздравить, генерал Мак приехал, совсем здоров, только немного тут зашибся - прибавил он, сияя улыбкой и указывая на свою голову. Генерал нахмурился, отвернулся и пошел дальше. - God, how naive! [Боже мой, как он прост! ] - сказал он сердито, отойдя несколько шагов. Несвицкий с хохотом обнял князя Андрея, но Болконский, еще более побледнев, с злобным выражением в лице, оттолкнул его и обратился к Жеркову. То нервное раздражение, в которое его привели вид Мака, известие об его поражении и мысли о том, что ожидает русскую армию, нашло себе исход в озлоблении на неуместную шутку Жеркова. - Если вы, милостивый государь - заговорил он пронзительно с легким дрожанием нижней челюсти - хотите быть шутом, то я вам в этом не могу воспрепятствовать; но объявляю вам, что если вы осмелитесьдругой раз скоморошничать в моем присутствии, то я вас научу, как вести себя. Несвицкий и Жерков так были удивлены этой выходкой, что молча, раскрыв глаза, смотрели на Болконского. - Что ж, я поздравил только, - сказал Жерков. - Я не шучу с вами, извольте молчать! - и крикнул Болконский, взяв за руку Несвицкого, пошел прочь от Жеркова, не находившего, что ответить. - Ну, что ты, братец - успокоивая сказал Несвицкий. - что Как? - заговорил князь Андрей, останавливаясь от волнения. - Да ты пойми, что мы, или офицеры, которые служим своему царю и отечеству и радуемся общему успеху и печалимся об общей неудаче, или мы лакеи, которым дела нет до господского дела. Quarante milles hommes massacres et l'Ario de nos mee allies detruite, et vous le mot pour rire trouvez la, - сказал он, как будто этою французскою фразой закрепляя свое мнение. - C'est bien pour un garcon de rien comme cet individu, dont vous avez fait un ami, mais pas pour vous pas pour vous. [Сорок тысяч человек погибло и союзная нам армия уничтожена, а вы можете при этом шутить. Это простительно ничтожному мальчишке, как вот этот господин, которого вы сделали себе другом, но не вам, не вам. ] Мальчишкамтолько можно так забавляться, - сказал князь Андрей по-русски, выговаривая это слово с французским акцентом, заметив, что Жерков мог еще слышать его. Он подождал, не ответит ли что корнет. Но корнет повернулся и вышел из коридора. IV Гусарский Павлоградский полк стоял в двух милях от Браунау. Эскадрон, в котором юнкером служил Николай Ростов, расположен был в немецкой деревне Зальценек. Эскадронному командиру, ротмистру Денисову, известному всей кавалерийской дивизии под именем Васьки Денисова, была отведена лучшая квартира в деревне. Юнкер Ростов с тех самых пор, как он догнал полк в Польше, жил вместе с эскадронным командиром. 11 октября, в тот самый день, когда в главной квартире всё было поднято на ноги известием о поражении Мака, в штабе эскадрона походная жизнь спокойно шла по-старому. Денисов, проигравший всю ночь в карты, еще не приходил домой, когда Ростов, рано утром, верхом, вернулся с фуражировки. Ростов в юнкерском мундире подъехал к крыльцу, толконув лошадь, гибким, молодым жестом скинул ногу, постоял на стремени, как будто не желая расстаться с лошадью, наконец, спрыгнул и крикнул вестового. - А, Бондаренко, друг сердечный - проговорил он бросившемуся стремглав к его лошади гусару. - Выводи, дружок, - сказал он с тою братскою, веселою нежностию, с которою обращаются со всеми хорошие молодые люди, когда они счастливы. - Слушаю, ваше сиятельство - отвечал хохол, встряхивая весело головой. - Смотри же, хорошенько выводи! Другой гусар бросился тоже к лошади, но Бондаренко уже перекинул поводья трензеля. Видно было, что юнкер давал хорошо на водку, и что услужить ему было выгодно. Ростов погладил лошадь по шее, потом по крупу и остановился на крыльце. "Славно! Такая будет лошадь! "Сказал он сам себе и, улыбаясь и придерживая саблю, взбежал на крыльцо, погромыхивая шпорами. Хозяин-немец, в фуфайке и колпаке, с вилами, которыми он вычищал навоз, выглянул из коровника. Лицо немца вдруг просветлело, как только он увидал Ростова. Он весело улыбнулся и подмигнул: "Yeah, good morning! Already, good morning! "[Прекрасно, доброго утра! ] Повторял он, видимо, находя удовольствие в приветствии молодого человека. - Already busy! [Уже за работой! ] - сказал Ростов всё с тою же радостною, братскою улыбкой, какая не сходила с его оживленного лица. - High Oestreicher! High Russians! Emperor Alexander high! [Ура Австрийцы! Ура Русские! Император Александр ура! ] - обратился он к немцу, повторяя слова, говоренные часто немцем-хозяином. Немец засмеялся, вышел совсем из двери коровника, сдернул колпак и, взмахнув им над головой, закричал: - And the whole world up! [И весь свет ура! ] Ростов сам так же, как немец, взмахнул фуражкой над головой и, смеясь, закричал: "And Vivat the world"! Хотя не было никакой причины к особенной радости ни для немца, вычищавшего свой коровник, ни для Ростова, ездившего со взводом за сеном, оба человека эти с счастливым восторгом и братскою любовью посмотрели друг на друга, потрясли головами в знак взаимной любви и улыбаясь разошлись - немец в коровник, а Ростов в избу, которую занимал с Денисовым. - барин Что? - спросил он у Лаврушки, известного всему полку плута-лакея Денисова. - С вечера не бывали. Верно, проигрались - отвечал Лаврушка. - Уж я знаю, коли выиграют, рано придут хвастаться, а коли до утра нет, значит, продулись - сердитые придут. Кофею прикажете? - Давай, давай. Через 10 минут Лаврушка принес кофею. Идут! - сказал он, - теперь беда. - Ростов заглянул в окно и увидал возвращающегося домой Денисова. Денисов был маленький человек с красным лицом, блестящими черными глазами, черными взлохмоченными усами и волосами. На нем был расстегнутый ментик, спущенные в складках широкие чикчиры, и на затылке была надета смятая гусарская шапочка. Он мрачно, опустив голову, приближался к крыльцу. - Лавг'ушка - закричал он громко и сердито. - Ну, снимай, болван! - Да я и так снимаю - отвечал голос Лаврушки. - А! ты уж встал, - сказал Денисов, входя в комнату. - Давно, - сказал Ростов, - я уже за сеном сходил и фрейлен Матильда видел. - Вот как! А я пг'одулся, бг'ат, вчег'а, как сукин сын! - закричал Денисов, не выговаривая р. - Такого несчастия! Такого несчастия! Как ты уехал, так и пошло. Эй, чаю! Денисов, сморщившись, как бы улыбаясь и выказывая свои короткие крепкие зубы, начал обеими руками с короткими пальцами лохматить, как пес, взбитые черные, густые волосы. - Чог'т меня дег'нул пойти к этой кг'ысе (прозвище офицера) - растирая себе обеими руками лоб и лицо, говорил он. - Можешь себе пг'едставить, ни одной каг'ты, ни одной, ни одной каг'ты не дал. Денисов взял подаваемую ему закуренную трубку, сжал в кулак, и, рассыпая огонь, ударил ею по полу, продолжая кричать. - Семпель даст, паг'оль бьет; семпель даст, паг'оль бьет. Он рассыпал огонь, разбил трубку и бросил ее. Денисов помолчал и вдруг своими блестящими черными глазами весело взглянул на Ростова. - Хоть бы женщины были. А то тут, кг'оме как пить, делать нечего. Хоть бы дг'аться ског'ей. - Эй, кто там? - обратился он к двери, заслышав остановившиеся шаги толстых сапог с бряцанием шпор и почтительное покашливанье. - Вахмистр! - сказал Лаврушка. Денисов сморщился еще больше. - Сквег'но - проговорил он, бросая кошелек с несколькими золотыми. - Г`остов, сочти, голубчик, сколько там осталось, да сунь кошелек под подушку, - сказал он и вышел к вахмистру. Ростов взял деньги и, машинально, откладывая и ровняя кучками старые и новые золотые, стал считать их. - А! Телянин! Здог'ово! Вздули меня вчег'а! - послышался голос Денисова из другой комнаты. - У кого? У Быкова, у крысы ... Я знал, - сказал другой тоненький голос, и вслед за тем в комнату вошел поручик Телянин, маленький офицер того же эскадрона. Ростов кинул под подушку кошелек и пожал протянутую ему маленькую влажную руку. Телянин был перед походом за что-то переведен из гвардии. Он держал себя очень хорошо в полку; но его не любили, и в особенности Ростов не мог ни преодолеть, ни скрывать своего беспричинного отвращения к этому офицеру. - Ну что, кавалерист молодой, как вам мой Грачик служит? - спросил он. (Грачик была верховая лошадь, подъездок, проданная Теляниным Ростову.) Поручик никогда не смотрел в глаза человеку, с кем говорил; глаза его постоянно перебегали с одного предмета на другой. - Я видел, вы нынче проехали ... - Да ничего, конь добрый, - отвечал Ростов, несмотря на то, что лошадь эта, купленная им за 700 рублей, не стоила и половины этой цены. - Припадать стала на левую переднюю ... - прибавил он. - Треснуло копыто! Это ничего. Я вас научу, покажу, заклепку какую положить. - Да, покажите пожалуйста, - сказал Ростов. - Покажу, покажу, это не секрет. А за лошадь благодарить будете. - Так я велю привести лошадь, - сказал Ростов, желая избавиться от Телянина, и вышел, чтобы велеть привести лошадь. В сенях Денисов, с трубкой, скорчившись на пороге, сидел перед вахмистром, который что-то докладывал. exactly small, ask for forgiveness? Denisov laughed. - You also worse. Bogdanitch vindictive, paid for stubbornness - Kirsten said. - By God, not obstinacy! I can not describe to you what a feeling, I can not ... - Well, your will, - said the staff captain. - Well, then this bastard-what happened? - he asked Denisov. - Affected patients zavtg'a told pg'ikazom excluded, - said Denisov. - It is a disease can not be explained differently, - said the staff captain. - Oh, where the disease is not a disease, but do not get caught it in my eyes - I'll kill! - bloodthirsty shouted Denisov. He entered the room Zherkov. - How are you? - suddenly asked officers to the newcomer. - Hike, gentlemen. Mac captive surrendered and the army, at all. - You're lying! - I saw it myself. - How? Poppy seen live? with his hands, with his feet? - Hike! Hike! Give him a bottle for such news. You how I got here? - Again, the regiment was sent, for the devil, for the Mac. Austrian general complained. I congratulated him with the arrival of Mac ... What are you, Rostov, just out of the bath? - Then, brother, we have such porridge second day. He entered the regimental adjutant and confirmed the news brought Zherkov. Tomorrow was ordered to act. - Hike, gentlemen! - Well, thank God, sat up. VI Kutuzov retreated to Vienna, destroying any bridges Ina rivers (in Braunau) and Traun (Linz). On October 23, .russkie troops were crossing the river Enns. Russian wagons, artillery, and columns of troops in the middle of the day dragged through the city of Enns, by Xu and on the other side of the bridge. The day was warm and rainy autumn. Extensive Perspective, reveals the dais, where there were Russian battery that protected the bridge, suddenly dragged a muslin curtain driving rain, it suddenly expanded, and in the light of the sun far and clearly became visible objects exactly varnished. I could see the town under their feet with its white houses and red roofs, the cathedral and the bridge on both sides of which, the crowd lilisya masses Russian troops. Could be seen at the turn of the Danube ships and the island, and a castle with a park, surrounded by the waters of the confluence of the Enns and the Danube, I could see the left rocky and covered with pine forest bank of the Danube with a mysterious green dalyu getting light blue tops and gorges. We could see the tower of the monastery, which is issued for pine, seemingly untouched, wild forest; far ahead on the mountain on the other side of the Enns, we could see the enemy patrols. Between the guns on top, standing in front with Chief of General ariergarda officer of the suite, looking at the chimney area. A few sat on the trunk behind guns Nesvitski sent by Commander in Chief to ariergardu. Cossack, accompanied Nesvitski filed handbag and a flask, and treated Nesvitski officers pies and doppelkyumelem present. Officers happily around him, who are on their knees, who sat cross-legged on the wet grass. - Yes, this is not a fool was an Austrian prince, the castle built here. Nice place. What you do not eat, gentlemen? - said Nesvitski. - Thank you very, Prince, - replied one of the officers with pleasure talking with such an important a staff officer. - Beautiful place. We passed by the park, saw two deer, and what a wonderful home! - Look, the prince, - said the other, who would love to take another pie, but was ashamed, and which therefore pretended that he looks around the area - Look, I do have got to get our infantry. Over there, in the meadow, behind the village, three taschut something. .They proberut the palace - he said with evident approval. - And then, and then - said Nesvitski. - No, but what I wanted, - he added, munching a pie in her beautiful wet mouth - so it's to get over there. He pointed to the monastery with towers that came into the mount. He smiled, his eyes narrowed and glowed. - But it would be good, gentlemen! The officers laughed. - If only scare those nuns. Italian, is said to have young. Right, five years of life would give! - They are in fact and boring - laughing, said the officer, who was bolder. Meanwhile officer of the suite, standing in front, pointed out that a general; General looked at the visual tube. - Well, it is, indeed, - said the general angrily, lowering the tube from the eyes and shrug - it is, will strike at the crossing. And what they linger? On the other side the naked eye could see the enemy and its battery, from which appeared milky-white smoke. Following the smoke Sectionalsya long-range shot, and it was like our troops hurried to the crossing. Nesvitski, panting, stood up and smiled, walked over to the general. - Would not you like a bite to Your Excellency? - he said. - It is not good business, - said the general without answering him - our hesitated. - Do not go, Your Excellency? - said Nesvitski. - Yes, take a trip, please - the general said, repeating what has just been ordered to detail - and tell the hussars that they last crossed the bridge and lit, as I ordered, so that the combustible materials on the bridge has to examine. - Very well, - I answered Nesvitski. He called the Cossack with his horse, ordered to remove the bag and flask and easily swung his heavy body on the saddle. - Right, nuns'll come to - he told the officers, with a smile looking down at him, and drove the winding path downhill. - Nut-ka, which will inform the captain, grabbing a minute! - the general said, referring to the gunner. - amuse bored. - Servants to the guns! - I ordered the officer. And in a moment of fun ran from the fires artillery and charged. - First! - Heard the command. Boyko bounced 1st number. Metallic, deafening, ringing a weapon, and through all of our heads under the hill, whistling grenade flew and, far short of the enemy, smoke showed the place of his fall and burst. Faces of the soldiers and officers brightened at the sound; all up and do observations of the visible, at a glance, the downward movement of our troops, and ahead of - the movements of the approaching enemy. The sun at the same moment at all came out from behind the clouds, and the beautiful sound of a solitary shot and the brilliance of bright sunshine merged into one bright and cheerful impression. VII on the bridge already passed two enemy core, and on the bridge was a crush. In the middle of the bridge, slezshi horse, pressed his fat body to the railing, stood Prince Nesvitski. He smeyuchis, looked back at his Cossack, who with two horses by the reins stood a few steps behind him. Just-Prince Nesvitski wanted to move forward as the soldiers again and carts pressed forward to it again and pressed him against the railing, and he had no choice but to smile. - Eka you, brother, my! - said the Cossack Furshtatskoy soldier with a cart, pushing the crowd v most wheels and horses infantry - Eka you! I do not have to wait: you can see, the general drive. But furshtat, ignoring the name of the general who shouted at the soldiers, zapruzhavshih his way: - Hey! countrywoman! hold on to the left, wait a minute! - But compatriot, crowding shoulder to shoulder, clinging bayonets and without interruption, moved across the bridge odnoyu solid mass. Looking over the railing down Nesvitski Prince saw the rapid, noisy, low waves of the Enns, which merge to Ryaba and curving around the piles of the bridge, distilled one another. Looking on the bridge he saw equally uniform living waves of soldiers, Kutas, quiver with covers, knapsacks, bayonets, long guns, and from under the shako face with high cheekbones, sunken cheeks and carefree-weary expressions and moving his feet on to coach on the bridge board sticky mud. Sometimes monotonous waves between soldiers as vzbryzg white foam in waves Enns, squeeze between soldiers officer in a raincoat, a soldier from his comfort physiognomy; sometimes, as a chip, a winding river, bridge was carried away by waves infantry foot hussar orderly or resident; sometimes like a log floating down the river, surrounded on all sides, swam across the bridge of company officer or imposed top, and covered with skins, carriage. - You see them as the dam burst, - stopping hopeless, said the Cossack. - A lot of my only weapon you still there? - Melion without one! - winking said close pass in a torn overcoat cheerful soldiers and hiding; followed by passing the other, an old soldier. - How did he (the enemy OH) tapericha the bridge would start to grill, - said the old soldier grimly, turning to his companion - forget itch. And the soldiers passed. Behind him, another soldier was riding in a cart. - Where the devil, podvertki stuffed? - said the orderly, run following the cart and fumbling in the tailgate. And this took place with the wagon. Behind this were funny and apparently drunk soldiers. - How did he, my dear man, polyhnet butt-in most teeth ... - happily said one of the soldiers in the highly-tucked his overcoat, widely swinging arm. - That's it, honey ham something. - replied the other, laughing. And they went, so Nesvitski never knew who was hit in the teeth and what belonged ham. - Ek hurry that onholodnuyu empty, and think of all slaughtered. - he said the non-commissioned officer angry and reproachful. - How does it fly past me, mister, the core of something - say, just to keep from laughing, with a huge mouth of a young soldier - and I froze. Right, by God, so ispuzhalsya, trouble! - said the soldier, as though showing off the fact that he was frightened. And this took place. Behind him followed a cart, unlike all the Pass until now. It was a German forshpan on a pair of loaded, it seemed, the whole house; for forshpanom who drove the Germans, it was tied pretty, variegated, with a huge vymem cow. On the feather was a woman with a baby, old and young, bagrovorumyanaya, healthy girl-German woman. Apparently, these evict residents were missed by special permission. All eyes turned to the women soldiers, and as long as the cart drove by, moving step by step, and all the comments related only to soldiers of the two women. Every face was almost the same smile lewd thoughts about this woman. - Look, sausage something, too, get out! - Sell mother - with emphasis on the last syllable, said another soldier, addressing the German, who, with downcast eyes, angry and frightened walking stride. - Ek cleaned like! That's the devil! - That you would stand to them, Fedotov. - Did you see that, brother! - Where are you going? - I asked an infantry officer, evshy apple, too poluulybayas and looking at the beautiful girl. The German closed his eyes showed he did not understand. - Do you want to take for yourself, - said the officer, giving the girl an apple. She smiled and picked up. Nesvitski, as well as all who were on the bridge, did not take his eyes off the women until they passed. When they passed, again we were the same soldiers, with the same talk, and finally all settled. As often happens, at the exit of the bridge into company hesitated horse wagon, and the whole crowd had to wait. - What are? The order is not present! - the soldiers said. - Where you're going? The devil! No to wait. Worse is how onmost set fire. You see, and have secured the officer - told from different sides to stop the crowd, looking each other, and all huddled forward to the exit. Looking back at the bridge on the water Enns, Nesvitski suddenly heard another new sound for him, quickly approaching ... something big and something flopped into the water. - What do you know, where Fata! - strictly he said, standing near the soldiers, looking back at the sound. - Cheer to soon passes, - said another restless. The crowd moved off again. Nesvitski realized that this was the core. - Hey, Cossack, Bring the horse! - he said. - Well you! side! stand aside! the way! It is with great effort to get to the horse. Without ceasing to shout, he moved forward. Soldiers shake, to give him the way, but once again pressed on him so that he trod on his leg, and the next were not to blame, because they pressed even harder. - Nesvitski! Nesvitski! You g'ozha! - I heard at this time behind a hoarse voice. Nesvitski looked round and saw fifteen paces separated him from a living mass of moving infantry red, black, shaggy, his cap on his head and valiantly, thrown over his shoulder Mentik Vaska Denisov. - Veli you them cheg'tyam, devils, give dog'ogu - shouted. Denisov evidently being in a fit of fervor, glistening and twitching his coal black eyes in the inflamed whites and waving nevynutoyu saber from its scabbard, which he held with such a as red as his face, like the top of a small hand. - E! Vasya! - I replied happily Nesvitski. - What do you mean? - Eskadg'onu pg'oyti impossible - shouted Vaska Denisov angrily revealing white teeth, spurs his beautiful raven, blood Bedouin who, blinking ears of bayonets, which he ran, snorting, splashing around him with foam die, ringing, beat their hooves on the planks of the bridge, and seemed ready to jump over the railing of the bridge, if it would have allowed the rider. - What is it? how bag'any! a hair's breadth bag'any! Pg'och ... let dog'ogu! ... Stay there! You wagon chog't! Izg'ublyu saber! - he cried, really taking unsheathed his sword and swing from it. Soldiers with frightened faces pressing against each other, and Denisov joined Nesvitski. - Why are not you drunk now? - said Denisov Nesvitski when he rode up to him. - And to drink something vg'emeni will not give! - I answered Vaska Denisov. - The whole day is there, then drag the regiment here. Dg'atsya - so dg'atsya. And chog't knows what! - How are you now a dandy! - surveying his new Mentik and saddlecloth, said Nesvitski. Denisov smiled, took out a handkerchief Tashkov propagating the smell of perfume, and put it in your nose Nesvitski. - It is impossible, in case I go! vybg'ilsya teeth cleaned and perfumed. Portly figure Nesvitski accompanied by a Cossack, and determination of Denisov, waving his sword and shouting desperately, acted in such a way that they are pushed his way to the other side of the bridge and stopped the infantry. Nesvitski found Colonel departure, which he had to pass an order, and fulfilling his commission, I went back. Cleared the way Denisov stopped at the entrance to the bridge. Casually suppressing bursting to his leg and bivshy stallion, he was looking at was moving toward him squadron. On the boards of the bridge rang clear hoof sounds like galloping horses more, and the squadron, officers in front of four in a row, stretched out on the bridge and began to go to the other side. Stopped infantry soldiers crowding in trampled in the mud bridge, with that peculiar malevolent sense of alienation and ridicule with which there are usually different kinds of troops, looking at clean, dapper hussar orderly passing by them. - Elegant guys! If only on Podnovinskoe! - What's the use of them! Only for show and drive! - said another. - Infantry, not dust! - joked hussars, under which the horse played, splattered with mud in the infantry. - would you shall chase a knapsack transition two, laces-they would povyterlis - Sleeve wiping the dirt from his face, said an infantryman; - and that man is a bird sitting! - That's the least you Zikin, put on a horse, you were clever, - joked the corporal over a thin, crooked on the severity satchel soldier. - baton between the legs it, here's the horse Buda - said the hussar. VIII rest of the infantry hurriedly passed over the bridge, at the entrance to funnel Spiro. Finally carts all passed, the crush became less and last battalion came onto the bridge. Some hussars squadrons of Denisov stayed on the other side of the bridge against the enemy. The enemy in the distance seen from the opposite mountains, bottom of the bridge, as from the hollow was not yet visible, through which the river flowed, the horizon ended in opposite elevation within half a mile. Ahead was a desert, through which in some places moved a handful of our traveling Cossacks. Suddenly on the road opposite the dais seemed troops in blue hood and artillery. These were French. Departure of Cossacks trotted walked downhill. All officers and men of the squadron Denisov, though, and tried to talk of other things, and look around, did not stop to think only about what was there on the mountain, and kept all peering into an outlet on the spot horizon, they recognize that the enemy's troops. The weather cleared up again in the afternoon, the sun is bright descended over the Danube and the surrounding dark mountains. It was quiet, and with the mountains occasionally came the sounds of horns and shouts of the enemy. Between the squadron and the enemy it was empty, except for small trips. Empty space, seven hundred yards separated them from him. The enemy ceased firing, and the more clearly felt that a strict and formidable, inaccessible and elusive trait that separates the two opposing armies. "One step at the line that resembles the line that separates the living from the dead, and - unknown suffering and death. And what's there? who's there? there, for this field, and wood, and the roof, illuminated by the sun? No one knows and wants to know; and scared to cross this line, and I want to pass it; and you know that sooner or later have to cross it and find out what's on that side of the line, as will inevitably find out that there is, on the other side of death. And the strong, healthy, happy and angry and surrounded by such healthy and irritated-busy people. " So if does not think, it feels every person in sight of the enemy, and the feeling it gives a special brilliance and sharpness of the joyful experience everything happening at this moment. On the Mount of the enemy seemed to smoke shot, and the kernel, whistling, flew over the heads of the hussar squadron. Officers standing together, parted in places. The hussars began carefully aligning horses. The squadron everything was quiet. All glances towards the enemy, and at the squadron commander, awaiting the team. Flew another, a third core. It is obvious that firing at the hussars; but the core of uniformly fast whistling flew over the heads of the hussar and hit somewhere in the back. Hussars have not looked, but every sound flying nucleus, as if on command, the whole squadron with its monotonous, diverse individuals, holding his breath until flew core, raised himself in his stirrups and lowered again. The soldiers, without turning his head, looked askance at each other curiously looking for impression mate. On every face, from Denisov to the bugler, appeared around the mouth and chin one thing in common struggle, irritability and anxiety. The sergeant frowned, eyeing the soldiers as if threatening punishment. Junker Mironov bent down at each span nucleus. Rostov, standing on the left untouched on his feet, but a prominent Rook had a happy look pupil, caused to a large audience for the exam, which he is sure to excel. He looked pale and clear at all, as if asking to pay attention to how he stands quietly under cores. But in his face the same feature something new and strict, against his will, shows about the mouth. - Who's bow? Yunkeg 'Mig'onov! Hexog'osho, smotg'ite me! - shouted Denisov, who does not stand still and that is spun on a horse in front of the squadron. Snub-nosed and chernovolosatoe face of Vaska Denisov, and his whole little knocked figure with his sinewy (with short fingers covered with hair) with the hand in which he held Ephesus excavated unsheathed sabers, was as accurate as ever, especially in the evening, after drinking two bottles. It was just more used to paint and cocked his shaggy head up, like birds when they drink, ruthlessly pressing in his little legs spurs into the sides of good Bedouin, he is like falling back, galloped to the other flank of the squadron, and a hoarse voice shouted, that examined pistols. He rode up to Kirsten. The staff captain, broad power and the mare, went a step towards Denisov. The staff captain, with his long mustache was serious as ever, but his eyes sparkled more than usual. - What? - he said Denisov, - will not come to fight the case. You will see that back leave. - Chog't knows what they are doing - growled Denisov. - BUT! G'ostov! - he shouted Junker noticed his cheerful face. - Well, wait. He smiled approvingly, apparently glad to cadets. Rostov felt perfectly happy. At this time, the chief appeared on the bridge. Denisov galloped toward him. - Your pg'evoskhoditelstvo! Let attack! I opg'okinu them. - What were the attack - said the head skuchlivym voice, wincing as of tiresome fly. - Why are you standing here? You see, back flankers. Keep ago squadron. The squadron crossed the bridge and walked out of the shots without losing a single man. Behind him moved and the second squadron, the former in the chain, and the last Cossacks cleared the other side. Two squadrons pavlogradtsev, crossed the bridge one by one, went back up the mountain. The regimental commander Karl Bogdanovich Schubert arrived at the squadron and rode Denisov step near Rostov, without paying any attention to him, despite the fact that after the collision of the former Telyanin, they saw now for the first time. Rostov, feeling in the front of the power of man to whom he now considered himself guilty, kept his eyes on the back of athletic, blond and red nape of the neck of the regimental commander. Rostov it seemed that only pretends Bogdanitch inattentive, and that the whole purpose of it now is to test the courage of the cadets, he straightened up and looked fun; then it seemed to him that Bogdanitch purposely rides close to Rostov show its mettle. Then he thought that his enemy is now deliberately sends a squadron in a desperate attack to punish him, Rostov. I think that after the attack he had come up to him and generously stretch it, the wounded, the hand of reconciliation. Pavlogradtsam familiar with high altitude shoulders, figure Zherkov (he recently retired from their regiment) arrived to the regimental commander. Zherkov, after his expulsion from the Main Staff, did not remain in the regiment, saying he is not a fool in front of the strap to pull, when he at the headquarters, doing nothing, will receive the award more orderly and able to settle down to Prince Bagration. - he asked Denisov. As soon as he closed his eyes, in his ears was heard firing rifles and guns, which merged with the clatter of the wheels and the impression of victory. Then he begins to present that Russian flee, that he killed; but he quickly woke up with happiness as if the newly found out that it was nothing, and that, on the contrary, the French fled. He again recalled all the details of victory, his calm courage during the battle, and, having calmed down, dozed off ... After a dark starry night came a bright, cheerful morning. The snow melted in the sun, the horse galloped quickly, and indifferent to right and left were a new variety of forests, fields, villages. At one of the stations he overtook Russian convoy wounded. Russian officer who conducted transport, lounging on the front of the cart, which was shouting, swearing rude soldier words. In the long German forshpanah shook the rocky road for six or more pale, bandaged and dirty wounded. Some of them said (he heard Russian speaking), others were eating bread, the most severe in silence, with a meek and sickly children's participation, looking at galloping past their courier. Prince Andrew told to stop and asked a soldier in any case injured. "The day before yesterday on the Danube," replied the soldier. Prince Andrew took out a purse and gave the soldier three gold. - In all, - he added, turning to the officer came up. - Get well, guys, - he said to the soldiers - still matters a lot. - What was the adjutant, what news? - I asked the officer, apparently wanting to talk. - Good! Forward - he shouted to the driver, and rode on. It was already quite dark when Prince Andrew entered Brunn and saw himself surrounded by tall buildings, the lights of shops, houses and lights of windows, noisy on the roadway crews beautiful and with a great atmosphere toyu bustling city that is always so attractive to the military man after the camp. Prince Andrew, in spite of a fast ride and a sleepless night, driving up to the palace felt even more lively than before. Only his eyes gleamed feverish brilliance, and thoughts have changed with extraordinary rapidity and clarity. Vividly him again all the details of the battle is no longer a vague, but definitely in the compressed statement, which he did in the imagination of the Emperor Francis. Vividly him random questions that could be made to it, and the answers that he will do on nih.On believed him now to present to the Emperor. But at the front entrance of the palace to him and he ran out of the official, recognized him as a courier, led him to another entrance. - Because the right of the corridor; over there, Euer Hochgeboren, [Your honor] will find the duty adjutant, - he said the official. - He holds to the Minister of War. Duty adjutant, who met Prince Andrew, asked him to wait and went to the Minister of War. Five minutes later the adjutant returned and especially courteously inclined and flowing Prince Andrew in front of him, led him down the hall to the office, where he was minister of war. Adjutant his exquisite courtesy, seemed to want to protect themselves from attempts familiarity Russian adjutant. Joyful feeling of Prince Andrew considerably weakened as he approached the door of the office of Minister of War. He felt insulted, and a sense of humiliation has passed at the same moment, unbeknownst to himself in the feeling of contempt, nor are based. Resourceful same mind at the same moment, showed him the view, with which he had a right to despise the adjutant and the minister of war. "They must be very easy to seem to win victories, not smelling of gunpowder!" He thought. His eyes narrowed with contempt; He especially, slowly entered the office of Minister of War. This feeling was reinforced when he saw the Minister of War, who was sitting at a large table and the first two minutes, do not pay attention to the newcomer. Minister of War, lowered his bald, with gray temples, her head between her two candles, reading, marking pencil and paper. He finished reading, without raising his head, while the door opened and he heard footsteps. - Take it and pass, - said the Minister of War to his adjutant, handing the paper and not paying more attention to the courier. Prince Andrew felt that either all cases occupying the minister of war, Kutuzov military action less likely it would be interested in, or have to give it to feel the Russian courier. "But I do completely still," he thought. Minister of War, pushed the rest of the paper, razed their edges with the edges and raised his head. He was a clever and distinctive head. But at the same moment as he turned to Prince Andrew, smart and strong expression of Minister of War, apparently, habitually and deliberately changed: his face stood dumb, pretending not hide his pretense, the smile, the host one by one, many asylum . - From Field Marshal Kutuzov? - he asked. - I hope the good news? It had an encounter with Mortier? Victory? It's time! He picked up the telegram, which was addressed to him, and began to read it with a sad expression. - Oh my god! Oh my God! Schmitt! - he said in German. - What a misfortune, what misfortune! Running through the dispatch he laid it on the table and looked at Prince Andrew, apparently pondering something. - Oh, what a misfortune! Deal, you say, decisive? Mortier has not been taken, however. (He thought). I am very glad that you have brought good news, though Schmidt's death there is price to pay for victory. His Majesty, true wish to see you, but not now. Thank you, relax. Tomorrow be output after the parade. However, I'll let you know. Disappeared while talking stupid smile again appeared on the face of the Minister of War. - Goodbye, thank you very much. The Emperor will probably want to see you - he said, and bowed his head. When Prince Andrew left the palace, he felt that all the interest and happiness, delivered him victory, leaving them now transferred to the indifferent hands of the Minister of War and suave aide. The whole warehouse of his thoughts instantaneously changed: the battle seemed to him a long-standing, distant memory. X Prince Andrew stayed at Brunn with his friend, a Russian diplomat .Bilibina. - But, my dear prince, no pleasant guest - said Bilibin, coming out to meet Prince Andrew. - Franz, in my bedroom Prince stuff! - he said to the servant, accompanied Bolkonsky. - What the messenger of victory? Perfectly. And I'm sick, you see. Prince Andrew, having washed and dressed and went out into the diplomat's luxurious study and sat down at the dinner cooked. Bilibin calmly sat down by the fire. Prince Andrew is not only after their journey, but after the whole campaign, during which he was deprived of all the comforts of purity and grace of life, I experienced a pleasant feeling of relaxation in the luxurious living conditions to which he was accustomed from childhood. In addition he was pleased after receiving Austrian talk, though not in Russian (they spoke in French), but with a Russian man who, he supposed, shared the general distaste Russian (now most vividly experienced) to the Austrians. Bilibin was a man of about thirty-five, single, one company with Prince Andrew. They had known each other in St. Petersburg, but has become more familiar in the last visit of Prince Andrew in Vienna with Kutuzov. Prince Andrew was a young man, promising to go far in the military field as well, and even more, on the diplomatic Bilibin promised. He was still a young man, but no longer a young diplomat, as he began to serve as a sixteen years old, was in Paris, Copenhagen and now in Vienna held a fairly large place. And the chancellor and our envoy in Vienna knew him and valued him. He was not one of a large number of diplomats who are required to have only negative virtues, is not known to do things and to speak French to be very good diplomats; He was one of those diplomats who love and know how to work, and in spite of his laziness, he sometimes spent the night at his desk. He worked equally well in whatever was the essence of the work. He was interested in the question is not "why?", And the question of "how?". What it was the diplomatic thing he did not care; but make skillfully, aptly and elegantly circular, memorandum or report - that he found great pleasure. Merit Bilibina appreciated but written work, and even on his art to address and speak in the higher spheres. Bilibin liked conversation just as he loved the work, only when the conversation could be elegantly witty. In society he always waited for the case to say something cool and join in the conversation except as under these conditions. Bilibin conversation constantly peppered with original, ingenious, finished phrases that have a common interest. These phrases were made in the internal laboratory of Bilibin as if on purpose, portable property for a paltry worldly people comfortably could memorize them and moved from the living room to living room. Indeed, les mots de Bilibine se colportaient dans les salons de Vienne, [Reviews Bilibin traveled through Vienna seating] and often had an impact on the so-called important things. Thin, emaciated, sallow face was all covered with large wrinkles, which always seemed so cleanly and carefully washed as the tips of the fingers after a bath. Movement of these wrinkles formed the main game of his face. Then he wrinkled his forehead wide folds, eyebrows raised upwards, the eyebrows down downwards, and the cheeks form large wrinkles. Deeply set, small eyes always looked straight and fun. - Well, now, tell us your exploits - he said. Bolkonski most conservative way, never mentioning himself, described the case and receiving the Minister of War. - Ils m'ont recu avec ma nouvelle, comme un chien dans un jeu de quilles, [They took me etoyu news as taking the dog when it interferes with the play of bowls] - he concluded. Bilibin smiled and dismissed the folds of skin. - Cependant, mon cher, - he said, looking at his nail from afar and picking up the skin above his left eye, - malgre la haute estime que je professe pour le Orthodox Russian army, j'avoue que votre victoire n'est pas des plus victorieuses. [But, my dear, with all due respect to the Orthodox Russian army, I believe that your victory is not the most brilliant. ] He went on all the same in French, uttering only those words, which he contemptuously like to emphasize in Russian. - How? You with all his weight fell on the unfortunate Mortier with one division, and that Mortier leaves between your hands? Where is the victory? - But, seriously speaking, - replied Prince Andrew - after all, we can say without boasting that it is a bit better in Ulm ... - Why do not we have one, at least one marshal? - Because not everything is supposed to, and not as regularly as in the parade. We thought, as I told you, go to the rear to seven o'clock in the morning and did not come, and to five in the evening. - Why do not you come to seven in the morning? You had to come at seven o'clock in the morning - with a smile said Bilibin, - it was necessary to come at seven o'clock in the morning. - Why do not you inspired Bonaparte by diplomatic means, he had better leave Genoa? - in the same tone said Prince Andrew. - I know - interrupted Bilibin, - do you think that it is very easy to take marshals, sitting on the sofa in front of fireplace. That's true, but still, why did you not get it? And do not be surprised that not only the minister of war, but also the august Emperor and the King of France would not be very blessed with your victory; and I, unhappy secretary of the Russian embassy, ​​do not feel any need for a sign of joy to give my Franz a thaler, and to let him go with his Liebchen [cute] to the Prater ... True, there is no Prater. He looked straight at Prince Andrew and suddenly pulled the skin collected from the forehead. - Now it's my turn to ask you "why", my dear, - said Prince Andrew. - I'll admit that I do not know, maybe there are diplomatic subtleties are beyond my weak mind, but I do not understand: Mack loses a whole army, the Archduke Ferdinand and the Archduke Karl give no signs of life, and make one mistake after another, finally one Kutuzov wins a real victory, destroying charme [charm] French Minister of war, and not even interested to know the details. - It is from this, my dear. Voyez-vous, mon cher: [You see, my dear:] hurray! for the king, for Russia, for the faith! Tout ca est bel et bon, [all of this is fine and good,] but that we, I say - the Austrian court, care about your victories? You bring us your pretty news of the victory of the Archduke Karl or Ferdinand - un archiduc vaut l'autre, [one another stands Archduke,] as you know - at least on a company fire brigade of Bonaparte, is another matter, we thunder in the gun. And it is, as if on purpose, can only tease us. Archduke Karl does nothing, the Archduke Ferdinand covered with shame. Vienna you throw, defend better, comme si vous nous disiez: [as if you told us:] God is with us, and God is with you, with your capital. One general whom we all loved, Schmidt: You let it down by a bullet, and congratulate us on the victory ... Agree that razdraznitelnee of the news that you bring, you can not come up with!. C'est comme un fait expres, comme un fait expres. [This is on purpose, as if on purpose. ] In addition, well, you're obsessed with exactly brilliant victory, will win even the Archduke Karl, why would a variable in the general course of affairs? Now it's too late, when Vienna is occupied by French troops. - How busy? Vienna engaged? - Not only occupied, but Bonaparte is at Schonbrunn, and the count, our dear Count Vrbna sent to him for orders. Prince Andrew after fatigue and travel impressions, reception and especially after lunch felt that he did not understand the full significance of the words that he had heard. - This morning there was Count Lichtenfels - continued Bilibin - and showed me a letter in which he described in detail the parade of the French in Vienna. Le prince Murat et tout le tremblement ... [Prince Murat and all that ...] You can see that your victory is not very happy, and that you can not be taken as a savior ... - Right, for me anyway, it is all the same! - said Prince Andrew, beginning to understand that his news of the battle of Krems really had little importance in view of events such as the occupation of the capital of Austria. - How did Vienna take? A bridge and the famous tete de pont, [bridge strengthening,] and Prince Auersperg? We have been rumors that Prince Auersperg protects Vienna, - he said. - Prince Auersperg standing on this, our, side and protects us; I think very poorly protected, but still protects. A Vienna on the other side. No, the bridge has not yet been taken and, I hope, will not be taken because it is mined, and ordered to blow up. Otherwise, we would be a long time in the mountains of Bohemia, and you against your army would have spent a bad quarter of an hour between two fires. - But it still does not mean that the campaign was over, - said Prince Andrew. - I think it was over. So think big caps here, but do not dare say it. Is that what I said at the beginning of the campaign that is not your echauffouree de Durenstein, [dyurenshteynskaya hassle] no gunpowder decides the matter, and those who invent it, - said Bilibin, repeating one of his mots [sayings], dismissing the skin and pausing on his forehead. - The only question is, what will the Emperor Alexander Berlin meeting with the King of Prussia. If Prussia to join the Union, on forcera la main a l'Autriche, [be forced Austria] and there will be war. If not, the only thing is that the conditions, which constitute the original article new cAMP Formio. [Campo Formio. ] - But what an extraordinary genius! - suddenly cried Prince Andrew, compressing his small hand and striking her on the table. - And what is the happiness of this man! - Buonaparte? [Bonaparte? ] - questioning Bilibin said, wrinkling his forehead and giving it to feel that now will un mot [word]. - B uonaparte? - he said, striking especially at u. - I think, however, that now, when he prescribes the laws of Austria Schönbrunn, il faut lui faire grace de l 'u. [It is necessary to get rid of and. ] I do strongly innovation and call him Bonaparte tout court [just Bonaparte]. - No, no joke, - said Prince Andrew, - do you really think that the campaign is over? - This is what I think. Austria remained in durah, and she not used to it. And it will pay back. And durah she stayed because, firstly, the province devastated (on dit, le Orthodox est terrible pour le pillage), [say that the Orthodox terribly part robberies] army is defeated, the capital taken, and all this pour les beaux yeux du [for the sake of beautiful eyes,] the Sardinian Majesty. And because - entre nous, mon cher [between us, my dear] - I hear flair that deceive us, I hear flair relations with France and worldwide projects, the secret world of individual prisoners. - It can not be! - said Prince Andrew, - it would be too disgusting. - Qui vivra verra, [Let's wait and see] - said Bilibin, spreading again the skin as a sign of the end of the conversation. When Prince Andrew went to the room prepared for him, and in a clean linen lay on the cushions and scented pillows Greta - he felt that battle, which he had brought the news, it was far, far from it. Prussian Confederation, betrayal of Austria, the new triumph of Bonaparte, and hits out, and the reception of Emperor Franz tomorrow occupied him. He closed his eyes, but at the same moment in his ears crackling gunfire, gunfire, the sound of carriage wheels, and then again descend from the mountains stretched thread mushkatery and the French fire, and it feels like shakes his heart, and he is coming forward near Шмитом, и пули весело свистят вокруг него, и он испытывает то чувство удесятеренной радости жизни, какого он не испытывал с самого детства. soothe in his excitement charm of its own story - this is what the sergeant who was set to the gun, a signal which should be lit mine and blow up the bridge, Sgt this, seeing that the French troops were running onto the bridge was about to shoot, but Lannes took his hand. The sergeant, who was evidently wiser than his general, goes to Auersperg and says, "Prince, you are deceived, that's French!" Murat sees that the case is lost, if to speak to the sergeant. He was surprised (this Gascon) turns to Auersperg: "I do not know much vaunted Austrian discipline in the world - he says - and you allow to speak to you the lowest rank!» C'est genial. Le prince d'Auersperg se pique d'honneur et fait mettre le sergent aux arrets. Non, mais avouez que c'est charmant toute cette histoire du pont de Thabor. Ce n'est ni betise, ni lachete ... [It's brilliant. Prince Auersperg insulted and ordered to arrest the sergeant. No, admit that it is the beauty of this whole story with the bridge. It's not that stupid, not like meanness ...] - S'est trahison peut-etre, [Perhaps treason] - said Prince Andrew, vividly imagining the gray overcoats, wounds, the smoke, the sound of gunfire and glory that He expects it. - Non plus. Cela met la cour dans de trop mauvais draps, - continued Bilibin. - Ce n'est ni trahison, ni lachete, ni betise; c'est comme a Ulm ... - He seemed lost in thought, searching expression: - c'est ... c'est du Mack. Nous sommes mackes, [also no. This puts the court in the most awkward position; it is no betrayal, no meanness or stupidity; it's like at Ulm, it's ... it Makovschina. We obmakovalis.] - he concluded, feeling that he said un mot, and the mot fresh, is the mot, which will be repeated. Collected until wrinkles on the forehead quickly blossomed into a sign of pleasure, and he was smiling slightly, he began to examine his fingernails. - Where are you going? - he said suddenly, turning to Prince Andrew, who got up and went to his room. - I'm going. - Where? - To Army. - Yes, you wanted to stay for two more days? - And now I'm going right now. And Prince Andrew, making disposal of the departure, went to his room. - You know what, my dear, - said Bilibin, coming into his room. - I thought about you. Why did you go? And this evidence is irrefutable argument folds all fled from the face. Prince Andrew looked at his companion and said nothing. - Why did you go? I know you think it's your duty - to skip to the army now that the army is in danger. I understand that, mon cher, c'est de l'heroisme. [My dear, it is heroism. ] - Not at all, - said Prince Andrew. - But you un philoSophiee, [philosopher] Be it well, look at things from the other side and you will see that your duty, on the other hand, take care of yourself. Leave it to others who are anything more not suitable ... You do not ordered to come back here and do not let go; therefore, you can stay and go with us where we will lead our unhappy fate. Say, they are going to Olmutz. Olmütz A very nice city. And we will go along quietly in my wheelchair. - Stop joking, Bilibin - said Prince Andrew. - I'm telling you sincerely and friendly. Judge. Where and what are you going now, when you can stay here? You will find one of two things (he collected the skin above the left temple) or you reach the army and peace is concluded, or defeat and disgrace with all Kutuzovsky army. And Bilibin dissolved the skin, feeling that his dilemma is irrefutable. - That I can not judge - coldly said Prince Andrew, and thought: "food in order to save the army." - Mon cher, vous etes un heros, [My dear, you - the hero] - said Bilibin. XIII On the same night, bowed to the War Minister, Prince Andrew went to the army, he did not know where he finds her, and fear on the road to Krems to be intercepted by the French. In Brunn all people fit at court, and already sent to Olmutz gravity. About Etselsdorfa Prince Andrew went to the road on which with the greatest haste and in the greatest disarray moved Russian army. The road was so jammed with carts that it was impossible to ride in a carriage. Taking the Cossack chief horse and a Cossack, Prince Andrew, hungry and tired, overtaking carts, riding to find in-chief and his chariot. The most sinister rumors about the army position reached him dear and kind of randomly-running Army confirmed these withHluchy. «Cette armee russe que l'or de l'Angleterre a transportee, des extremites de l'univers, nous allons lui faire eprouver le meme sort (le sort de l'armee d'Ulm)», [ «This Russian army, which English gold has transferred here from the end of the world will experience the same fate (the fate of the Ulm army). " ] He recalled the words of the order of Bonaparte of his army before the campaign, and these words are equally excited to surprise him for the brilliant hero, a sense of wounded pride and the hope of glory. "And if there is nothing left but to die? he thought. Well, if you need to! I'll do it better than others. " Prince Andrew looked with disdain on those endless, interfere with the team, vehicles, parks, artillery and again the carts, wagons and carts of all possible kinds overtaking one another in three, in four rows zapruzhavshie dirt road. On all sides, back and forth, while grabbing the ear, heard the sound of wheels, the rumble of car bodies, carts and carriages, the tramp of a horse, whip blows, screams prodding, cursing the soldiers, orderlies and officers. Along the edges of the road could be seen constantly the fallen stripped and neobodrannye horse, the broken carts, who, waiting for something, sat a lone soldier, then separated from the command soldiers who crowds heading to neighboring villages or dragged from chickens villages, sheep, hay or bags filled with something. On the descent and ascent of the crowd made thicker, and was a continuous moaning cries. Soldiers, sinking of the knee in the dirt picked up on hand guns and trucks; beat whips, slipping hooves burst traces and screamed cries chest. Officers, stewards movement, then back and forth between the passing carts. Their voices were heard faintly in the midst of the general hum, and could see by their faces that they despaired of the possibility to stop this mess. «Voila le cher [" That's expensive] Orthodox army, "thought Prince Andrew, recalling the words of Bilibin. Wanting to ask any of these people, where the commander in chief, he approached the baggage. Opposite him was driving the country in a horse carriage, apparently arranged by means of home soldiers, representing the middle ground between a wagon and a convertible stroller. The crew of the rules and the soldiers sat under a leather upper for apron woman all tied a handkerchief. Prince Andrew arrived and has already addressed a question to the soldier when his attention was drawn desperate cries woman sitting in kibitochke. The officer was in charge of the baggage, hitting a soldier sitting in the perambulator coachman, because he wanted to overtake the other, and the whip fell on the apron of the crew. A woman screamed. Seeing Prince Andrew, she leaned out from under the apron and waving thin arms, jumped out from under the carpet handkerchief, screaming: - The adjutant! Sir adjutant ... For God's sake ... Protect ... Well this is ... I lekarskaya wife of the 7th Chasseurs ... are not allowed?; we are lagging behind, lost his ... - The cake smashed, wrapped! - shouted angry officer to the soldier - wrapped back with his whore. - Mr adjutant protection. What is it? - shouted lekarsha. - Kindly ignore this wagon. Can not you see it's a woman? - said Prince Andrew approaching the officer. The officer looked at him and, without answering, turns again to the soldiers - those I overeat ... Back ... - Skip, I'm telling you - again repeated, pursing his lips, Prince Andrew!. - And who are you? - suddenly, with drunken fury officer approached him. - Who are you? You (he especially rested on you) boss, eh? Here, I'm the boss, not you. You're back, - he said - in the cake smashed. This expression apparently liked officer. - It is important to Drop adyutantika - came a voice from behind. Prince Andrew saw that the officer was in a drunken fit of causeless rage, in which people do not remember what they say. He saw that his intercession for lekarskuyu wife in kibitochke fulfilled what he feared most in the world, what is called ridicule [funny], but instinct told him more. Do not have time to finish the last words of the officer, Prince Andrew with a disfigured face fury rode up to him and raised his whip: - Because of wills, those pro-pus-tit! The officer waved his hand and hastily rode away. - All of these, from the staff, the whole mess - he grumbled. - Do Well, as you know. Prince Andrew hastily, without looking up, pulled away from the lekarskoy wife called him a savior, and disgust remembering the smallest details of this humiliated-tion stage, jumped on to the village where he was told, was a commander in chief. Having entered the village, he dismounted and went to the first house with the intention to relax even for a moment, eat something and bring clarity to these harassing, tormenting his mind. "This is a crowd of scoundrels and not an army," he thought, going to the window of the first house, when a familiar voice called him by his name. He looked around. From a small window protruded beautiful face Nesvitski. Nesvitski chewing something juicy mouth and waving his arms, called him to her. - Prince Andrew, Prince Andrew! Do not you hear something? Go soon, - he shouted. Entering the house, Prince Andrew saw Nesvitski and yet another adjutant, eating something. They quickly turned to Bolkonsky with a question, whether he knows anything new. On their faces as he knew Prince Andrew read the expression of anxiety and worry. Saying this was particularly noticeable in the always-laughing face Nesvitski. - Where is the commander in chief? - asked Prince Andrew. - Here, in the house - he replied the adjutant. - Well, it is true that peace and capitulation? - asked Nesvitski. - I'm asking you. I do not know anything, except that I could hardly get to you. - And we have a brother that! Horror! Vinyus, brother of Mac laughed, and by worse falls - said Nesvitski. - Yes, sit just eat anything. - Now that the prince nor the carts will not find anything, and your Peter God knows where - another aide said. - Where are the headquarters? - In Znaim night. - And I perevyuchil itself everything that I need two horses, - said Nesvitski - and packs other than I did. Though scoot through the Bohemian mountains. Bad brother. Why, surely ill, so you shudder? - asked Nesvitski, noticing how Prince Andrew possessed, as if at the touch of a Leyden jar. - Nothing, - he replied Prince Andrew. He remembered at that moment about a recent encounter with his wife and lekarskoyu Furshtatskoy officer. - What in chief doing here? - he asked. - I do not understand, - said Nesvitski. - One thing I realize that everything loathsome, vile and disgusting, - said Prince Andrew, and went into the house, where there was a commander in chief. After passing the crew Kutuzov, riding horses tortured suites and Cossacks, talking loudly among themselves, Prince Andrew entered the hall. Kutuzov himself as the said Prince Andrew, she was in the house with Prince Bagration and Weyrother. Weyrother he was an Austrian general who replaced slain Schmitt. In the hallway small Kozlovsky squatted in front of the clerk. The clerk at the inverted a tub, the turn-up cuffs of his uniform, hastily wrote. Kozlowski's face was haggard - it can be seen, the night did not sleep. He glanced at Prince Andrew and did not even nod his head. - The second line ... posted? - he continued dictating clerk - Grenadier Kiev, Podolsky ... - Do not pospeesh, sir, - replied the clerk disrespectful and angry, looking back at Kozlovsky. From behind the door was heard at this time animated voice-dissatisfied Kutuzov interrupted by other, unfamiliar voice. From the sound of those voices, inadvertently, which looked at him, Kozlovsky, in disrespect exhausted clerk, by the fact that the clerk and Kozlovsky were so close to the Commander in Chief on the floor near the vats, and by the fact that the Cossacks were holding the horses, laughing loudly at windows home - around the Prince Andrew felt that was going to happen something important and unfortunate. Prince Andrew Kozlowski strongly appealed to with questions. - Now, Prince, - said Kozlovsky. - Disposition Bagration. - A capitulation? - No no; made orders for battle. Prince Andrew went to the door, because of which were heard voices. But at the time, he wanted to open the door, the voices in the room fell silent, the door opened itself, and Kutuzov, with his aquiline nose at the puffy face appeared in the doorway. Prince Andrew was standing directly in front of Kutuzov; but in the words of Chief of the only sighted eyes I could see that the thought and care so much interested him, that seemed dimmed his sight. He just looked at the face of his aide, and did not recognize him. - Well, that finished? - he said to Kozlovsky. - Right this moment, Your Excellency. Bagration, short, with the eastern type of solid and immobile face, dry, not yet old man came out of the commander in chief. - I have the honor to appear - rather loudly repeated Prince Andrew, handing the envelope. - And, of Vienna? Good. After, after! Kutuzov went out on the porch with Bagration. - Well, Prince, goodbye - he said Bagration. - Christ be with you. I bless you in the great feat. Kutuzov's face suddenly softened and tears in his eyes. He pulled her to him with his left hand Bagration, and the right, which was a ring, apparently, familiar gesture of the cross over him and offered him a plump cheek, instead of which Bagration kissed him on the neck. - Christ be with you! - Kutuzov repeated and went up to the carriage. - Sit down with me, - he said Bolkonsky. - Your Excellency, I would like to be helpful here. Let me stay in the troop of Prince Bagration. - Sit down, - said Kutuzov, and noticing that Prince Andrew is slow - I need good officers are very, very necessary. They got into the carriage and drove in silence for several minutes. - Still to come are many, many things will happen - he said to the old man's expression of insight, as though realizing everything that was done in Bolkonski soul. - If the detachment of its come tomorrow one tenth, I will give thanks to God, - he added Kutuzov, as if talking to himself. Prince Andrew glanced at Kutuzov, and he inadvertently struck by, in poluarshine him, purely washed assembly scar on his temple Kutuzov, where Izmail bullet penetrated his head, and his eyes spilled. "Yes, he has the right to talk so calmly about the death of these people!" Thought Prince Andrew. - From what I ask to send me to the squad - he said. Kutuzov did not answer. He seemed to have forgotten much of what was said to them, and sat thinking. Five minutes later, rocking gently on the soft springs strollers, Kutuzov turned to Prince Andrew. On his face there was no trace of emotion. He asked with a subtle mockery of Prince Andrew about the details of his meeting with the Emperor on feedback heard at the court of kremskom fact, and some common acquaintances women. Kutuzov XIV through its spy received on November 1 news, becoming almost komanduemuyu their army to a stalemate. Scout reported to the French forces in huge clicking the Vienna bridge, went on the road with the message Kutuzov host that came from Russia. If Kutuzov decided to remain at Krems, the polutorastatysyachnaya Napoleon's army would have snapped it from all messages that have surrounded him with forty thousand worn out by the army, and he would have been in the position of Mack at Ulm. If Kutuzov decided to leave the road that led to messages with troops from Russia, he was supposed to come off the road into the unknown edge of the Bohemian mountains, defending himself against superior enemy forces, and give up all hope of a message with Buksgevdenom. If would Kutuzov decided to retreat along the road from Krems to Olmutz to join up with troops from Russia, he risked being warned this way the French had crossed the bridge in Vienna, and thus be forced to accept battle on the march, with all the gravity and carts, and when dealing with the enemy, three times surpasses it and surrounding it on both sides. Kutuzov chose this last solution. French, as reported to the spy, crossing the bridge at Vienna, reinforced march went to Znaim, which lay in the path of retreat Kutuzov, ahead of its more than a hundred miles. Reach Znaim before the French - it meant to get a great hope for the salvation of the army; to warn the French themselves in Znaim - probably meant to expose the shame of the whole army, similar to Ulm or total destruction. But to warn the French, with the whole army it was impossible. The way the French from Vienna to Znaim was shorter and better than Russian road from Krems to Znaim. Night received the news, Kutuzov sent Bagration's vanguard chetyrehtysyachny right around the corner from kremsko-Znaim road at the Vienna-Znaim. Bagration had to go without a holiday this transition, face to stop and back to Vienna to Znaim, and if he would be able to warn the French that he had to detain them as he could. Kutuzov himself with all the weights moved to Znaim. Having a hungry, barefoot soldiers without a road, in the mountains, on a stormy night forty-five miles away, losing a third of the backward, Bagration came out in Gollabrun the Vienna-Znaim road a few hours before the French, who approached Gollabrunu from Vienna. Kutuzov had to go another whole day with their carts to reach Znaim, and therefore to save the army, Bagration had four thousand hungry, exhausted soldiers hold during the day all the enemy's army, to meet him in Gollabrune that was obviously impossible. But a strange fate made the impossible possible. The success of the deception, which he gave up without a fight Vienna bridge in the hands of the French, led Murat to try to deceive the same and Kutuzov. Murat, encountering weak detachment of Bagration on the Znaim road, I thought that it was a whole army of Kutuzov. To surely crush this army, he was waiting for the stragglers on the way from Vienna troops and with this object offered a truce for three days, on the condition that they and other forces have not changed their positions and do not budge. Murat assured that already are negotiating about the world and that, therefore, avoiding useless bloodshed, he offers a truce. Austrian General Count Nostitz, who was standing at the outposts, he believed the words of Murat truce and retreated, revealing a detachment of Bagration. Another envoy went to Russian chain to announce the same news about the peace talks and to propose a truce Russian troops for three days. Bagration replied that he can not decide whether or not to accept a truce, and with a report on the proposal to make it to Kutuzov sent his adjutant. Kutuzov truce was the only way to gain time to rest exhausted detachment of Bagration and skip wagons and gravity (the movement which has been hidden from the French), although an extra shift to Znaim. truce proposal made it unique and unexpected opportunity to save the army. After receiving the news, Kutuzov sent immediately when it consisted of the Adjutant General Winzegorode in the enemy camp. Winzegorode should not only accept the truce, but also to offer terms of surrender, and meanwhile Kutuzov sent his adjutants back to hurry as far as possible the movement of convoys of the army kremsko-Znaim road. Exhausted, hungry detachment of Bagration was one, covering a movement of transports and the entire army, to remain motionless in front of the enemy eight times as strong. The expectations were fulfilled as the Kutuzov about what surrender proposal or non-binding, would allow time to pass some of the carts, and about what Murat's mistake was to open very soon. As soon as Bonaparte, who was at Schonbrunn, 25 miles from Gollabruna, Murat received a report and a draft truce and surrender, he saw the deception and wrote the following letter to Murat: Au prince Murat. Schoenbrunn, 25 brumaire en 1805 a huit heures du matin. «II m'est impossible de trouver des termes pour vous exprimer mon mecontentement. Vous ne commandez que mon avant-garde et vous n'avez pas le droit de faire d'armistice sans mon ordre. Vous me faites perdre le fruit d'une campagne. Rompez l'armistice sur-le-champ et Mariechez a l'ennemi. Vous lui ferez declarer, que le general qui a signe cette capitulation, n'avait pas le droit de le faire, qu'il n'y a que l'Empereur de Russie qui ait ce droit. «Toutes les fois cependant que l'Empereur de Russie ratifierait la dite convention, je la ratifierai; mais ce n'est qu'une ruse.Mariechez, detruisez l'armee russe ... vous etes en position de prendre son bagage et son artiller. «L'aide-de-camp de l'Empereur de Russie est un ... Les officiers ne sont rien quand ils n'ont pas de pouvoirs: celui-ci n'en avait point ... Les Autrichiens se sont laisse jouer pour le passage du pont de Vienne, vous vous laissez jouer par un aide-de-camp de l'Empereur. Napoleon ». [Prince Murat. Shenbryunn, 25 Brumaire, 1805 8:00 am. I can not find words to express my displeasure. You command only my advance guard, and may not make the armistice without my order. You make me lose the fruits of the whole campaign. Immediately break off the truce and go against the enemy. You told him that the general who signed that capitulation had no right to do so, and no one has, except for a Russian emperor. However, if the Emperor of Russia to agree to the above condition, I also agree; but it is not nothing but a trick. Go and destroy the Russian army ... you can take it transports and its artillery. Adjutant General of the Russian Emperor deceiver ... Officers are nothing when you do not have the powers of the authorities; He also does not have it ... The Austrians let themselves deceive the transition of the Vienna bridge, and you give yourself to deceive the emperor adjutants. Napoleon. ] Bonaparte's adjutant at full speed horse galloping with this menacing letter to Murat. on the other side of the ravine. Prince Andrew, constantly being the commander in chief, watching the movements of the masses and the general regulations and is constantly engaged in historical descriptions of battles, and in this case the coming involuntarily pondered the future course of military operations only in general terms. It should be provided only to the following kind of major accident: "If the enemy will lead the attack on the right flank, - he said to himself, - Kiev Grenadier and Podolsky Jaeger will have to hold its position as long as the center of the reserves are not suitable for them. In this case the dragoons could hit the flank and to overturn them. In the case of the attack on the center, we are putting on this dais central battery and under the guise of contract the left flank and back down to the ravine echelons, "he reasoned to himself ... All the time that he was on battery at the guns, he is often is, still, the officers heard the sound of voices, saying in the shed, but did not understand a single word of what they said. Suddenly the sound of voices from the booth struck him such a sincere tone, he began to listen involuntarily. - No, my dear, - said a pleasant and seemed familiar to Prince Andrew's voice, - I say that if it were possible to know what will happen after death, then it would be the death of us, and no one was afraid. That's the way, my dear. Another, younger voice interrupted him: - Yes, be afraid, do not be afraid, do not care - not minuesh. - And all scared! Oh, you learned men, - said a third manly voice interrupting them both. - That's you, artillery, and very ucheny because all can take away with them, and vodka and appetizer. And the owner of the manly voice, evidently an infantry officer, laughed. - And all afraid, - continued the first familiar voice. - Afraid of the unknown, that's what. Whatever you may say, that the soul goes to heaven ... because we know that there is no heaven, a realm alone. Manly voice again interrupted the artillery officer. - Well, the herbalist ugostite something yours, Tuszyn, - he said. "Ah, this is the captain, who without his boots stood by the sutler," thought Prince Andrew, gladly recognizing a pleasant voice to philosophize. - Travnichku possible - said Tushin - and still to grasp the future life ... He did not finish. At this time, the air whistling heard; closer, closer, faster and louder, louder and faster, and the kernel, it does not seem to have agreed to all that had to be, with superhuman strength blowing spray, plopped into the ground near the shed. The earth seemed to gasp from the terrible shock. At the same moment he jumped out of the booth before all with a little Tushin zakushennoyu to the side tube; kind, intelligent face was somewhat pale. Behind him came the ruler of courageous voices molodtsovaty infantry officer, and ran to his company, buttoning on the run. XVII Prince Andrew stopped riding on the battery by looking at the smoke gun, which flew out of the core. His eyes ran over the vast space. He only saw the first fixed-weight French swayed, and that was really left the battery. It has not yet dispersed the smoke. Two French horse probably adjutant galloped up the hill. Downhill is likely to enhance the chain moving distinctly-vidnevshayasya small column enemy. Even the smoke of the first shot is not cleared as to show others smoke and shot. The battle began. Prince Andrew turned his horse and galloped back into the ground to find Prince Bagration. Behind him he heard the cannonade became more and more loudly. It can be seen, our beginning to respond. Downstairs, in the place where parliamentarians passed, he heard gunshots. Lemarrua (Le Marierois) with a menacing letter Bonaparte had just rode up to Murat and ashamed Murat, wishing to make amends for his mistake, immediately moved his troops into the center and bypassing both flanks, hoping before evening and before the Emperor's arrival crush puny facing These detachment. "Began! That's it! "Thought Prince Andrew, feeling the blood more often began to surge to his heart. "But where? As well expressed my Toulon? "He thought. Passing between the same mouth that ate porridge and drinking vodka a quarter of an hour ago, he always saw the same rapid movements under construction and disassembled rifles soldiers and all the people he recognized the feeling of revival that was in his heart. "Began! Here it is! Scary and fun! "Says the face of every soldier and officer. Not reached before the build fortifications, he saw in the evening light of an overcast autumn day to move toward him on horseback. Advanced, in cloak and cap with pelts, riding on a white horse. It was Prince Bagration. Prince Andrew stopped, waiting for him. Prince Bagration stopped his horse and recognizing Prince Andrew nodded his head. He continued to look forward to while Prince Andrew told him what he had seen. The expression "has begun! here it is! "was even on the strong Karem Prince Bagration's face with half-closed, dull, as if the sleepy eyes. Prince Andrew with a restless curiosity looked at this motionless face, and he wanted to know whether and feels and what he thinks, feels that this person is thinking at that moment? "Is there anything at all out there for this motionless face?" Wondered Prince Andrew, looking at him. Prince Bagration bowed his head in assent to the words of Prince Andrew and said: "Good", with an expression as if everything that happened and that he reported, was exactly what he had anticipated. Prince Andrew, huddled on the speed of the ride, spoke quickly. Prince Bagration uttered the word with its eastern accent particularly slowly, as if suggesting that no hurry. He touched, however, trotting his horse toward the battery Tushino. Prince Andrew, along with his entourage went after him. Prince Bagration rode for: officer of the suite, a personal aide of Prince, Zherkov, orderly staff officer at englizirovannoy beautiful horse and a civilian official, an auditor who was asked out of curiosity to go to battle. The auditor, stout man with a full face, with a naive smile of joy looked around, shaking his horse, presenting a strange appearance in his overcoat kamlotovoy Furshtatokoy seat among the hussars, Cossacks and adjutants. - That want to see battles - said Zherkov Bolkonski, pointing to the auditor - yes really sick in the stomach. - Well, enough of you, - said the auditor with a beaming, naive and with sly smile, as if he was flattered that he was the subject of jokes Zherkov, and as if he were deliberately trying to look stupid than he was in fact. - Tres drole, mon monsieur prince, [Very funny, my lord prince] - said the staff officer. (He remembered that in French as a particularly referred to the title of prince, and could not adjust.) At this time, they all drove up to the battery of Tushino, and in front of them struck the core. - Well it fell? - smiling naively, I asked the audience. - Cakes French - Zherkov said. - This is a hit, huh? - I asked the audience. - What a Passion! And he seemed to dissolve all of the fun. As soon as he finished speaking as again there was suddenly a terrible whistling, suddenly ceased blow into something liquid, and sh-sh-sh-flop - a Cossack, riding slightly to the right and rear of the auditor, the horse fell to the ground. Zherkov and the staff officer bent down to the saddle, and they turned away the horses. Auditor stopped in front of a Cossack, with attentive curiosity regarding it. Cossack was dead, the horse still struggled. Prince Bagration, squinted, looked back, and seeing the cause of the incident confusion indifferently looked away, as if to say: whether to engage in nonsense! He stopped his horse, with taking a good rider, a few bent and straightened to cling to the burka sword. The sword was old, not that which is now worn. Prince Andrew remembered the story of how Suvorov in Italy has presented his sword to Bagration, and he was particularly pleased that memory at this moment. They drove to the battery itself, which was Prince Andrew, when considering the field of battle. - Whose company? - I asked Prince Bagration at the bombardier, who was standing at the boxes. He asked, Whose company? but in essence he asked: Do you really not shy here? And gunner figured it out. - Captain Tushino, Your Excellency, - stretching, cried a cheerful voice redhead, with freckled face, gunner. - Well, well, - said Bagration, pondering something, and rode past the limbers to extreme gun. While he drove, from an instrument of the, stunning it and retinue shot rang out, and the smoke, suddenly surrounded by cannon gunners could see, picked up the gun and hurried straining, rolled it into place. Broad-shouldered, huge soldiers with 1st-bath, legs spread wide, bounced off the wheel. 2nd trembling hand put a charge into the muzzle. Small round-shouldered man, officer Tushin, stumbling on the trunk, ran forward, not noticing the general and peeking out from under a small pen. - Two Heap line, just so it will be, - he shouted in a thin voice, which he tried to give molodtsovatost not marching to his figure. - Second! - he squeaked. - Cruz, Medvedev! Bagration called an officer, and Tushin, timid and awkward movement, not as military salute, as well as the priests bless, putting three fingers to his cap, approached the general. Although Tushina guns were appointed in order to bombard the ravine, he shot brandskugelyami on vidnevsheysya ahead Shengraben village, in front of which put forward the great masses of French. Nobody ordered Tushino, where and how to shoot, and he consulted with his sergeant Zakharchenko, which had a lot of respect, he decided that it would be good to light a village. "Good!" Said Bagration, the officer began to examine the report and everything opens up the field of battle, as if trying to figure something. On the right side came closest French. Below the height at which the Kiev regiment stood in the ravine of the river could be heard lacks the soul erratic rattle of guns, and much more to the right, with the dragoons, officer of the suite pointed prince to bypass our flank column of the French. Left horizon was limited to close forest. Prince Bagration ordered two battalions from the center to go to reinforce the right. Officer of the suite ventured to observe the prince, that the care of these battalions guns remain without cover. Prince Bagration turned to the officer of the suite, and dull eyes looked at him in silence. Prince Andrew felt that observation officer of the suite was fair and that there was nothing really to say. But at this time the adjutant came galloping from the regimental commander, who was in a hollow, with the news that the great masses of the French were the bottom of that regiment upset and retreats to the Kiev grenadiers. Prince Bagration bowed his head in assent and approval. He went a step to the right and sent an adjutant to the dragoons with orders to attack the French. But sent to the adjutant arrived half an hour later with the news that dragoon colonel already retreated behind the ravine, because it was directed against the heavy fire, and he lost in vain, and the people in a hurry because the shooters in the forest. - Good! - Bagration said. While he drove away from the battery to the left, too, shots were heard in the forest, and as it was too far to the left flank to catch himself to come in time, Prince Bagration sent to Zherkov said Senior General, the same one who represented Kutuzov Regiment in Braunau, he retreated to how you can hurriedly over the ravine, because the right wing, probably can not be a long time to hold the enemy. About Tushina same battalion, was covering him, was forgotten. Prince Andrew listened carefully to the conversation of Prince Bagration with the chiefs and gave them orders, and to the surprise to notice that orders any otdavaemo was not, and that Prince Bagration was just trying to pretend that everything was done out of necessity, chance and the will of private bosses that all this was done, though not at his command, but according to his intentions. Thanks to the tact that showed Prince Bagration, Prince Andrew noticed that, in spite of this coincidence of events and the independence of the will of the chief, his presence made it very much. Chiefs with frustrated persons drove up to Bagration, becomes calm, the soldiers and officers greeted him gaily and became more animated in his presence and apparently paraded before him by his bravery. XVIII Prince Bagration, riding on the highest point of our right flank, began to go down, which could be heard erratic shooting and nothing is visible was from the gunpowder. The closer they came down to the ravine, the less it becomes visible, but the more sensitive the closeness became a veritable battlefield. They began to meet wounded. One with a bloody head, without a cap, dragged by two soldiers under arms. He wheezed and spit. The bullet hit, seen in the mouth or throat. Another, who met them cheerfully walking alone, without a gun, groaning loudly and waving his hand from the fresh pain from which blood flowed as from stklyanki on his overcoat. His face seemed more than scared, than to suffer. He was a minute ago, I was wounded. Moving the road, they began to cool down, and on the slope saw a few people who were; they met a crowd of soldiers, among whom were not wounded. The soldiers went up the hill, panting, and despite the general view, talking loudly and waving their hands. Ahead, in the smoke were visible rows of gray overcoats, and the officer, seeing Bagration, ran screaming for soldiers marching crowd, demanding that they gate. Bagration rode up to the ranks, which is here and there quickly snapping shots, drowning out voices and shouts of command. All the air was saturated with gunpowder smoke. Faces of the soldiers were all bloated and gunpowder quickened. Others were killed ramrod others sprinkled on the shelves were getting charge of the bags, the third shot. But who they shot, it was not evident from the gunpowder, not carried away by the wind. Quite often we heard the pleasant sounds of buzz and pinging. "What it is? - I thought Prince Andrew approaching the crowd of soldiers. - It can not be an attack, because they do not move; can not be Carré: they are not so. " Skinny, weak-looking old man, the colonel, with a nice smile, over the centuries, which is more than half-closed his old eyes, giving it a gentle appearance, rode up to Bagration and accepted him as the owner of the honored guest. He reported Bagration that against his regiment was horse attack the French, but that while this attack was repelled, the regiment lost more than half of the people. The colonel said that the attack was repulsed by inventing this military title of what was happening in his regiment; but he really did not know what happened in that half-hour of troops entrusted to him, and could not with certainty say whether the attack is repulsed or his regiment was defeated by the attack. In early action, he knew only that throughout his regiment began to fly the kernel and grenades and beat people that then someone shouted, "cavalry", and we began to shoot. And shot still is not in the cavalry, which had disappeared, and in the French infantry, which appeared in a ravine and shot by our own. Prince Bagration bowed his head as a sign that everything was exactly as he wished and expected. Turning to his adjutant he ordered him to bring the mountain two battalions of the 6th Chasseurs, by which they are now passed. Prince Andrew was struck at that moment, a change that has taken place in the person of Prince Bagration. His face expressed the concentrated and happy resolution, which is a person who is ready to jump on a hot day in the water and taking the last run. There was no sleepy eyes dim, nor feigned profound kind: round, solid, Hawkeye enthusiastic and somewhat scornfully looked forward obviously on anything not stop, although his movements remained still slow and measured. The colonel turned to Prince Bagration, entreating him to drive off ago, because there was too dangerous. "Excuse me, your excellency, for God's sake!" He said, glancing at the confirmation of officer of the suite, which turns away from him. "Here, if you please!" He gave notice bullets constantly screamed, sang and whistled around them. He spoke in a tone of reproach, and a request with which the carpenter said holding ax master "our usual thing, and you handle namozolil". He spoke as if he himself could not kill these bullets, and his half-closed eyes gave him an even more convincing expression. Staff officer joined the exhortations of the regimental commander; Prince Bagration, but they did not answer and only ordered to cease fire and built in such a way to make room for an approach to two battalions. While he spoke, as if by an invisible hand reached out from right to left, from the risen wind, the curtain of smoke that hid the ravine, and the opposite mountain with moving on it by the French opened before them. All eyes were involuntarily fixed on the French column, move us and writhing on the ledges areas. Already were visible furry hats soldiers; it was possible to distinguish the officers from the rank and file; it was seen as a wag of the shaft of the banner. - Nice going, - said someone in the entourage of Bagration. easily ran up to him, frightened Rostov. He grabbed the gun and instead of firing it, threw it in the Frenchman and ran to the bushes that had power. Not with that feeling of doubt and struggle, with which he went to Ensk bridge, ran it, and with a feeling of a hare fleeing from the dogs. One indivisible feeling of fear for their young, happy life possessed his whole being. Quickly jumping over boundaries, with that rapidity with which he ran around, playing in the burner, he flew over the field, occasionally wrapping his pale, good, young face, and cold fear ran down his spine. "No, it is better not to look," he thought, but ran to the bushes, looked back again. The French left behind, and even at that moment he looked back, the front has just changed trot back and turned to something much shouting hindmost. Rostov stopped. "Something is wrong, - he thought - can not be that they wanted to kill me." Meanwhile, his left hand was so heavy, like-pound weight was priveshana to it. He could not run further. The Frenchman also stopped and took aim. Rostov closed his eyes and leaned forward. One, the other bullet flew, buzzing past him. He gathered his last strength, he took his left hand to the right and ran to the bushes. The bushes were Russian direction. XX Infantry regiments, taken by surprise in the woods, running out of the woods, and companies, mingling with the other companies of, leaving disorderly crowds. One soldier said in fright at the terrible war and meaningless word "cut!", And the word together with a sense of fear communicated itself to the whole mass. - Bypassed! Cut off! Gone! - screaming voices running. The regimental commander, at the very moment he heard shooting and screaming back, I realized what had happened something terrible with his regiment, and the thought that he, an exemplary, served for many years, in no way guilty officer might be guilty before superiors in the oversight or mismanagement, so impressed him that at that moment, forgetting the recalcitrant cavalry colonel and his general's importance, and most importantly - completely forgetting about the danger and the sense of self-preservation, he grasped the pommel of the saddle and spurs the horse, galloped to Sprinkle the regiment under a hail but chastlivo passed him bullets. He wanted one thing: to find out what was happening, and help and correct in that no matter what the error, if it was on his part, and not be guilty of it, twenty-two years to serve, nothing noticed, exemplary officer. Happily galloped between the French, he rode up to the forest field, through which ran our own and not obeying commands down the hill. There was that moment of moral hesitation which decides the fate of battles: listen to the voices of the crowd frustrated soldiers or their commander, looking at him, will run next. Despite the desperate cry before so formidable a soldier voices regimental commander, despite furious, purple, the person does not like the regimental commander and Mahane sword, all the soldiers fled, talking, firing into the air and did not listen to the command. The moral hesitation, decides the fate of battles is obviously allowed to fear. General coughed from screaming and powder smoke and stopped in despair. All seemed lost, but at that moment the French were advancing on our own, suddenly, for no apparent reason, ran back, fled from the edge of the forest, and the forest seemed to Russian direction. It was the company Timohina, who was alone in the forest kept in order and, having sat down in a ditch in the forest, suddenly attacked the French. Timohin with such a desperate cry rushed to the French and with such a wild and drunken determination, with the sole skewer, passed over to the enemy, that the French, unable to recover, dropped their weapons and fled. Dolokhov, running beside Timokhin, at point blank range and killed one Frenchman took the first collar surrendered officer. Running back, battalions assembled, and the French, was divided the army into two parts, the left side for a moment have been pushed aside. Reserve units had time to connect, and the fugitives stopped. The regimental commander was Major Ekonomova at the bridge, letting themselves retreating by companies when a soldier came up to him, took him by the stirrup and almost leaned towards him. A soldier was bluish, factory cloth overcoat, a knapsack and shako was not, his head was tied, and over his shoulder was wearing the French charging bag. is hein his hands he held an officer's sword. The soldier was pale, his blue eyes looked impudently in the face of the colonel and his mouth ulybalsya.Nesmotrya that he could not regimental commander was busy saluting the orders of Major Ekonomova not pay attention to the soldier. - Your Excellency, here are two trophies - Dolohov said, pointing to the French sword and pouch. - Me captured officer. I stopped the company. - Dolokhov breathed heavily from weariness; he spoke with stops. - The whole company can testify. I beg to remember, Your Excellency! - Well, well, - said the regimental commander and addressed to Major Ekonomova. But Dolokhov did not move; he untied the handkerchief, pulled him and showed the blood clotted in her hair. - bayonet wound, I stayed in the front. You mark your Excellency. About battery Tushina was forgotten and only at the very end of the case, still hearing the cannonade in the center, Prince Bagration sent to the staff officer and later Prince Andrew to enjoin the battery back down as soon as possible. Cover, standing near the Tushino guns, took on someone's orders, in the middle of the case; but the battery continued to shoot and was not taken by the French only because the enemy could not assume audacity firing four guns protected by nobody. On the contrary, the energetic action of this battery it is assumed here, in the center, focused primarily Russian forces, and twice tried to attack this point and both times was shooing grapeshot shot standing alone on this dais four guns. Soon after the departure of Prince Bagration Tushin could ignite Shengraben. - You see, zasumyatilis! Lights! You see, the smoke somehow! Deftly! Important! Smoke something, smoke something! - I spoke servants, perking up. All guns without orders beat in the direction of the fire. As if adjusting, podkrikivali soldiers for each shot: "Clever! That's so true! Look, you ... It's important! "The fire, by the wind, spread rapidly. French colony, were in favor of the village, went back, but, as if in punishment for this failure, the enemy put to the right of the village ten guns and began to beat one of Tushino. Due to the children's joy, excited by fire, and excitement good shooting on the French, our gunners noticed that the battery only when the two nuclei, and after them four struck between the instruments and one tumbled down two horses, and another lost his leg, pans counselor. Revival, just installed, however, is not weakened, but only a change of mood. Horses were replaced by others of a spare mast, removed the wounded, and four guns turned against desyatipushechnoy battery. The officer, Comrade Tushino, was killed at the beginning of the case, and in the course of an hour of forty servants withdrew seventeen, but the gunners were all so cheerful and animated. Twice they noticed that at the bottom, close to them, the French were shown, and then they beat them by buckshot. The little man, with a weak, awkward movement, claimed himself constantly in orderly yet tube for it, as he said, and, spilling out of her fire, ran forward and out of the small hand looking at the French. - Cruz, guys! - he kept saying he himself would pick up guns in the wheel and unscrew the screws. In the smoke, deafened by the incessant shots, makes it every time shudder, Tuszyn, not letting his nosogrelki, ran from one weapon to another, taking aim, then counting the charges, then disposing of change and perepryazhkoy dead and wounded horses, and shouting their weak thin, hesitant voice. His face was becoming more and more animated. Only when killed or injured people, he winced and turned away from the dead man, angrily shouting at people, as always, hesitated to raise or wounded body. The soldiers, for the most part pretty well done (as always in the battery company, two heads taller than his officer and twice as wide as it), all the children in a difficult situation, looked at his commander, and then the expression that was on his face, always It reflected on their faces. As a consequence of this terrible rumbling noise, attention to the needs and activities Tushin did not feel the slightest unpleasant feeling of fear and the thought that it can kill or hurt hurt, did not come into his head. On the contrary, it became more and more fun and more fun. It seemed to him that a long time ago, perhaps yesterday was the moment when he saw the enemy and fired the first shot, and that a piece of the field, where he stood, he had long been familiar, related sites. Despite the fact that he still remembered all pondered, did everything he could to make the best officer in his position, he was in a state similar to a feverish delirium or the condition of a drunken man. Due to stun on all sides by the sounds of their instruments, because of the whistles and blows the enemy shells, because of the kind sweaty, flushed, hurrying about servants guns, because the sight of blood of men and horses, because of the kind Dymkov enemy on the side (after that every time flies core and beat the ground in person, into a weapon or a horse), because of the kind of things he has established his fantasy world in his head, which was his delight at this moment. Enemy guns are not guns were in his imagination, and the tube from which the rare clubs let out smoke smoker invisible. - You see, puffed again, - said Tushin whisper to himself, while the mountain slipped out a cloud of smoke and wind belonged to the left band - now wait for the ball - to send back. - What do you want, sir? - I asked the gunner, who was standing close beside him and hear what he muttered something. - Nothing, a grenade ... - he replied. "Well, our Matvevna," he said to himself. Matvevnoy seemed in his imagination most extreme, an old cannon casting. Ants seemed to him the French about their guns. Handsome and drunk the first issue of the second gun in his world had an uncle; Tushin looked more likely at him and rejoiced at his every move. The sound of the freezes, it again reinforces the gun shootout under the mountain seemed to him someone's breath. He listened to the remission and flare-ups of these sounds. - Look, breathed again, breathed - he said to himself. He presented a huge growth, a powerful man who throws both hands core French. - Well, Matvevna, Mother, do not betray! - he said, stepping away from the gun as above his head there was a strange, unfamiliar voice: - Captain Tuszyn! Captain! Tushin looked frightened. It was the staff officer who drove him out of the ground. He's breathless voice shouted to him: - What are you, crazy. You twice ordered to retreat, and you ... "Well, what they told me? ... 'thought to myself Tushin with fear looking at the boss. - I ... nothing ... - he said, the charge of two fingers to his cap. - I ... But the colonel did not finish all that he wanted. Close flown core made him, diving, horse bend. He stopped and just wanted to say something else, as another core to stop him. And he turned his horse and galloped away. - Retreat! All retreat! - he shouted from afar. The soldiers laughed. A minute later came the adjutant with the same orders. It was Prince Andrew. The first thing he saw on leaving the space that held the gun Tushina was unharnessed horse with a broken leg, which is pulled by horses neighing around. From her feet as of key bloodshed. Between the limbers lay several killed. One core after another flew over him, while he was driving, and he felt a nervous shiver ran down his spine. But the thought that he fears again held it. "I can not be afraid," he thought, and slowly dismounted between instruments. He gave orders and did not go to the battery. He decided that in itself will remove the guns from the position and will take them. Together with Tushin, stepping through the body and for the terrible fire French, he started cleaning instruments. - And then come at the authorities, fought so soon - said the artilleryman to Prince Andrew - not as your honor. Prince Andrew said nothing to Tushino. They were both so busy and that seemed to never seen each other. When wearing the survivors of four two guns in the front end, they went down the hill (one shattered gun and the unicorn were left behind), Prince Andrew arrived at the Tushino. - Well, goodbye, - said Prince Andrew, reaching Tushino. - Goodbye, my dear, - said Tushin - sweet soul! Farewell, my dear, - said Tushin with tears, which for some unknown reason suddenly made his eyes. XXI The wind died down, the black clouds hung low over the site of the battle, merges on the horizon with powder smoke. It was getting dark, and the more clearly designated in two places at the glow of fires. Cannonade became weaker, but the rattle of guns behind and to the right could be heard more often and closer. Once Tushin with his weapons, circling and bumping on the wounded, came out of the fire, and went down into the ravine, he met with the heads and aides, among whom were the staff officer and Zherkov twice sent and did not reach to battery Tushino. All of them, interrupting each other, gave orders and committed, as well as where to go, and to make his criticisms and comments. Tushin nothing to dispose of and silence, afraid to speak because at every word he was ready, without knowing why, cry, I went back on his artillery nag. While the wounded were ordered to throw a lot of them taschilos the troops and asking for guns. The same molodtsovaty infantry officer who jumped out before the battle of the hut Tushino, was, with a bullet in the abdomen, put on a gun carriage Matvevny. Under a mountain of pale hussar cadet, one arm supporting the other, he went to Tushin and asked to sit down. - Captain, for God's sake, I was wounded in the hand, - he said timidly. - For God's sake, I can not go. For God's sake! It was evident that the cadet has repeatedly asked to sit anywhere and everywhere refused. He asked indecisive and pathetic voice. - Order the plant, for God's sake. - Sit, sit, - Tushin said. - to enclose an overcoat, you, uncle - he turned to his favorite soldier. - And where the wounded officer? - to lay down, over, - said someone. - Sit. Sit down, my dear, sit down. Podstelil overcoat, Antonov. Juncker has been Rostov. He kept one hand on the other, was pale, and the lower jaw trembled with feverish trembling. He was put on Matvevnu, on the very instrument with which laid the dead officer. Planted on the overcoat was blood which soiled breeches and hands Rostov. - What, you're hurt, my dear? - Tushin said, approaching the gun on which Rostov sat. - No, wounded. - Why is blood on a bed? - asked Tuszyn. - It officer, your honor, okrovyanil, - replied the soldier-artilleryman, wiping the blood-sleeved overcoat, as if apologizing for uncleanness, in which a weapon was. With difficulty, with the help of infantry weapons were taken up the hill, and has reached the village guntersdorf stopped. It has become so dark that the ten steps it was impossible to distinguish between the uniforms of the soldiers, and the skirmish began to subside. Suddenly, near the right side could be heard shouting and firing again. Of the shots already shone in the darkness. It was the last French attack, which met soldiers entrenched in the houses of the village. Again, all rushed to the village, but Tushina guns could not move, and gunners, Tuszyn and Junker, looked at each other in silence, awaiting his fate. The exchange of fire began to die down, and from side streets emptied talking animatedly soldiers. - intact, Petrov? - I asked one. - Set, brother, heat. Now do not stick, - said another. - Nothing to be seen. They in their something fried! Can not see; darkness, brothers. Is not there to get drunk? The French were last beaten back. And again, in complete darkness, Tushina guns as a frame surrounded gudevsheyu infantry moved somewhere ahead. In the darkness, as though an invisible flowed, dark river, all in one direction, humming whisper, speak and sounds of hooves and wheels. In general, the hum of all the other sounds were clearer all the groans and voices of the wounded in the darkness of night. Their moans seemed to pervade all this darkness surrounding troops. Their moans and the darkness of the night - it was the same thing. After some time, the excitement was in the moving crowd. Someone drove with his entourage on a white horse and said something while driving. What did you say? Where to now? Stand, eh? Thank you, or what? - heard the greedy inquiries from all sides, and all the moving mass began to emphasize on itself (seen front stopped), and the rumor that commanded to stop. Everyone stopped as were, in the middle of a dirt road. It lit up with lights, and it was heard speak. Captain Tushin ordering of company, sent a soldier to find a dressing point or doctor for cadets and sat by the fire, spread out on the road the soldiers. Rostov also drag the fire. Feverish trembling with pain, cold and damp shook his whole body. Sleep irresistibly tended to him, but he could not sleep from the excruciating pain nyvshey and is not in the position the hand. He then closed his eyes, then glanced at the fire, which seemed to him a hot-red, then stooped figure Tushina weak, sitting cross-legged beside him. Great good and intelligent eyes Tushina with sympathy and compassion, rushed at him. He saw that the whole soul Tushin wanted and could do nothing to help him. On all sides were heard footsteps and voices held, Pass and are placed around the infantry. The sound of voices, steps and interchanged in the mud of horses' hooves, the near and far crackling wood merged into one oscillating hum. now no longer flowed as before, in the darkness of the invisible river, and if after a storm fit and fluttered dark sea. Rostov pointless watched and listened to what was happening to him and around him. Infantry soldiers came to the fire, squatted, thrust his hands into the fire and turned his face away. - Nothing, sir? - he said, referring to questioning Tushino. - That's strayed from the company, your honor; I do not know where. The trouble! Together with the soldier fire approached infantry officer with bandaged cheek and turning to Tushin, he requested Kroshechka order to move the gun to the cart to transport. For the company commander came running to the two soldiers fire. They swore and fought desperately, pulling each other some boots. - How do you raised! Look, agile - shouted a hoarse voice. Then came a thin, pale soldier with the neck bandaged podvertkoy bloodied and angry voice demanded water from the gunners. - Well, dying or something, like a dog? - he said. Tuszyn ordered to give him water. Then he ran a cheerful soldiers, asking for a spark to the infantry. - Got a light hot to the infantry! Good luck, countrywoman, thank you for the light, we give back with interest, - he said, taking off into the dark reddish firebrand. For the soldier four soldiers, carrying something heavy on his overcoat, walked past the fire. One of them stumbled. - Look, hell, road wood laid, - he grumbled. - Come, why wear it? - said one of them. - Well, you! They disappeared in the darkness with his burden. - What? It hurts? - I asked Tushin whisper at Rostov. - It hurts. - Your Honor, to the general. There in the house are, - said the gunner, coming up to Tushino. - Now, darling. Tushin stood and buttoned his coat, and recovering, walked away from the fire ... not far from the fire artillery, in the house prepared for him, Prince Bagration sat at dinner, talking with some of the chiefs of parts, assembled with him. There was an old man with half-closed eyes, greedily gnawing a mutton bone, and twenty-two impeccable general, flushed from a glass of vodka and dinner, and the staff officer with a nominal ring and Zherkov, looking uneasily all and Prince Andrew, pale, with compressed lips and feverishly sparkling eyes. The hut stood leaning against corner taken French flag, and the auditor with the naive face fingered banner fabric, and were perplexed, shaking his head, perhaps because it really interested in kind of banner, and perhaps because it was hard hungry to look for lunch, for which he has not got the device. In the next hut he was taken prisoner by the French dragoons Colonel. We crowded around him, seeing it, our officers. Prince Bagration was thanking the individual commanders and inquiring about details of the case and the losses. The regimental commander, presents under Braunau, reported to the prince, that once started a business, he stepped out of the forest, collected drovorubov and let them go by themselves, with two battalions hit with hostility and overthrew the French. - As I saw Your Excellency that the first battalion of upset, I started on the road and think, "skip this meeting and battle the fire"; I did. The regimental commander was so anxious to do so, he regretted that he could not do it, that it seemed to him that all this was exactly. Even, perhaps, in fact, was it? Was it possible to sort out this confusion, what was and what was not? - And I must say, your excellency, - he continued, recalling Dolohov conversation with Kutuzov and his last to date with demoted - that soldier was demoted Dolokhov, my eyes captured a French officer, and particularly distinguished. - This is where I saw, Your Excellency, attack pavlogradtsev - uneasily, intervened Zherkov which is not seen in this day of hussars, but only heard about them from an infantry officer. - Crumpled two squares, your excellency. zovov and social classes were so many that Pierre even more than in Moscow, felt a sense of cloudy, haste and all coming, but did not commit some good. From his former singles society many were not in St. Petersburg. Guard went hiking. Dolokhov was demoted, Anatole was in the army, in the province of Prince Andrew was abroad, so Pierre could not spend any nights, as he liked to spend their first or take occasional soul in a friendly conversation with a senior respected friend. All the time it took place at the dinners, balls and mainly Prince Basil - in the thick of Princess society, his wife, Helen, and beauty. Anna Pavlovna Scherer, as well as others, hast Pierre change that had taken place in the public look at it. Before Pierre in the presence of Anna Pavlovna always I felt that what he says, indecent, tactless, not what you want; speech that it seemed to him clever as he prepares them in your mind, do stupid as soon as he loudly uttered, and that, on the contrary, the most stupid question Hippolyte go clever and cute. Now all he said no, everything came out charmant [charmingly]. If even Anna Pavlovna did not say that, he could see that she wanted to say, and it is only in respect of his modesty, he refrained from doing so. At the beginning of the winter from 1805 to 1806, Pierre has received from Pavlova's usual pink note with an invitation, which was adding: «Vous trouverez chez moi la belle Helene, qu'on ne se lasse jamais de voir». [I will have beautiful Helen, which never get tired to admire. ] Reading this place Pierre for the first time felt that between him and Helene formed some kind of connection, recognized by others, and the thought at the same time and frightened him as if it imposes an obligation that he could not keep, and together he liked how funny suggestion. The evening of Anna Pavlovna was the same as the first, only a novelty, which treated Anna Pavlovna their guests, was now not Mortemart, and diplomat, who arrived from Berlin and had brought the latest details on the presence of the Emperor Alexander in Potsdam and how the two highest friend swore there in indissoluble union to defend a just cause against the enemy of the human race. Pierre was admitted Anna Pavlovna with a touch of sadness, obviously applies to fresh loss that befell a young man, to the death of Count Bezukhov (all constantly felt duty to tell Pierre that he was very distressed death of his father, whom he barely knew), - and sadness exactly the same as the one supreme sorrow, which was expressed at the mention of the august Empress Maria Feodorovna. Pierre felt flattered by this. Anna Pavlovna with his usual art circles arranged his living room. A large circle, which were Prince Vasili and the generals enjoyed diplomat. Another circle was at the tea table. Pierre wished to join the first, but Anna Pavlovna, who was in an irritable state of the commander on the battlefield, when they come thousands of new brilliant ideas that are barely have time to execute, Anna Pavlovna, seeing Pierre, touched his finger sleeve. - Attendez, j'ai des vues sur vous pour ce soir. [I have upon you this evening. ] She looked at Helene and smiled at her. - Ma bonne Helene, il faut, que vous soyez charitable pour ma rauvre tante, qui a une adoration pour vous. Allez lui tenir compagnie pour 10 minutes. [My dear Helen, it is necessary for you to be compassionate towards my poor aunt who feeds you adoration. Stay with her for about 10 minutes] And so you do not feel bored, here's the dear count who will not refuse for you to follow. Beauty went to the aunt, but Anna Pavlovna Pierre still kept near him, showing it appear as though she had to make even last the necessary orders. - Does it delicious is not it? - she said to Pierre, pointing to sail majestic beauty. - Et quelle tenue! [And keeps himself! ] For such a young girl, and this time with such a masterful ability to behave! It comes from the heart! I am happy to be the one whose it is! With her, the most unworldly husband would not help to hold the most brilliant in the world. Is not it? I just wanted to know your opinion - and Anna Pavlovna let Pierre. Pierre replied with sincerity Pavlova yes to question her about the art of Helene to behave. If he ever thought about Helen, I thought it was about her beauty and that it is not an ordinary quiet ability to be silent in the light-worthy. Aunt took in his corner of the two young men, but seemed willing to hide her adoration for Helene and wanted to express more fear of Anna Pavlovna. She glanced at her niece, as if to ask what to do with these people. Departing from them, Anna Pavlovna again touched Pierre finger sleeve and said: - J'espere, que vous ne direz plus qu'on s'ennuie chez moi, [I hope you do not tell the other times that I miss,] - and I looked at Helen. Ellen smiled with a look that said she did not admit the possibility that someone could see her, and not to be admired. Aunt coughed, swallowed and said in French that she was very pleased to see Helene; then he turned to Pierre with the same welcoming and at the same mine. In the middle of stumbling skuchlivogo and Helen talk looked at Pierre and smiled that smile, clear, beautiful, she smiled at everyone. Pierre was so used to that smile, so little she expressed to him that he did not pay her any attention. Aunt said at the time of collection of snuff, which was with the late Pierre's father, Count Bezukhov, and showed his snuffbox. Princess Helene asked to see a portrait of her husband's aunt, who was placed on this snuffbox. - It is true, do Venus - Pierre said, calling the famous miniaturist, bending down to the desk to pick up the snuff-box, and listened to the conversation at another table. He stood up, wanting to get around, but the aunt handed snuffbox right through Helen, behind her. Helen leaned forward to make room, and, smiling, looked back. She was, as always in the evenings, in a very open on the fashion front and back of the dress. Her bust, which seemed always marble to Pierre, was in such a short distance from his eyes, he could not help his myopic eyes could distinguish the living charm of her shoulders and neck, and so close to his mouth, that he should have a little bend down to touch her. He could hear the warmth of her body, the smell of perfume and skryp her corset while driving. He did not see her marble beauty, is integral with her dress, he saw and felt the charm of her body, which had been closed only clothing. And again when he saw it, he could not see otherwise, we can not go back to the time to explained the hype. "So you did not notice until now, how beautiful I am? - as if Helen said. - Have not you noticed that I'm a woman? Yes, I am the woman who may belong to everyone, and you too, "said her eyes. And at that moment Pierre felt that Helene not only could, but should be his wife, that it can not be otherwise. He knew that at that moment as surely as if he knew it, standing at the altar with her. As it will be? and when? he did not know; I did not even know whether it will be good (he even felt that it was wrong for some reason), but he knew it would be. Pierre dropped his eyes, raised them again and again wanted to see her so far off, another man for himself beauty, as he had seen her every day before; but he could no longer do it. He could not, as a man can not, first looked into the fog on a blade of grass weeds and who saw in her tree, she saw a blade of grass, to see again in her tree. She was terribly close to him. She already had power over him. And between him and her there was no longer any obstacles other than barriers of his own will. - Bon, je vous laisse dans votre petit coin. Je vois, que vous y etes tres bien, [Okay, I'll leave you in your corner. I see you there well] - the voice said Anna Pavlovna. And Pierre, with the fear of remembering, if he has not done anything reprehensible, blushing, looked around. It seemed that everyone knows as well as he did, about what happened to him. Some time later, when he went to a large mug, Anna Pavlovna told him: - On dit que vous embellissez votre maison de Petersbourg. [They say you get off with his St. Petersburg home. ] (It was true: the architect said, that is necessary for him, and Pierre, without knowing why, trim his huge house in St. Petersburg.) - C'est bien, mais ne demenagez pas de chez le prince Vasile. Il est bon d'avoir un ami comme le prince, - she said, smiling at Prince Vasili. - J'en sais quelque chose. N'est-ce pas? [That's good, but do not move away from Prince Vasili. Good to have a friend. There's something I know about it. Is not it? ] And you are still so young. Need advice. You're not mad at me, that I use the old women rights. - She fell silent as always silent woman, expecting something after say about their year. - If you get married, then another thing. - And she joined them in one glance. Pierre did not look at Helene, and she looked at him. But she was just as terribly close to him. He mumbled something and blushed. Back home, Pierre could not sleep, thinking about what had happened to him. What happened to him? Nothing. He had just realized that the woman he had known the child, about which he said absently: "Yes, good," when he was told that Helen beauty, he realized that this woman might belong to him. "But she's stupid, I told myself that she was stupid - he thought. - Something nasty is, in that sense, which she opened in me, something forbidden. I was told that her brother Anatole was in love with her, and she was in love with him, that was the whole story, and that from this sent away Anatole. Her brother - Hippolyte ... Her father - Prince Vasili ... This is not good, "he thought; and at the same time, he reasoned that (even reasoning these remained unfinished), he caught himself smiling and was conscious that another series of arguments pop up from behind the first, that he is at one and the same time thinking of her worthlessness and dreamed of she would be his wife, she can fall in love with him, she can be quite different, and how everything that he thought about it and heard, can not be true. And again he saw it not a sort of Prince Vasili's daughter, and saw her whole body only veiled in gray dress. "But no, why it did not previously occurred to me that idea?" And again, he said to himself that it was impossible; something nasty, unnatural, he thought, it would be unfair in this marriage. He recalled her former words, attitudes, and words and views of those who had seen them together. He remembered the words and looks of Anna Pavlovna, when she told him about the house, recalled thousands of such hints from Prince Vasili and others, and he found the horror if he did not connect much himself to be something in the performance of the business, which, apparently, wrong and that he should not do. But at the same time, as he himself expressed this decision, on the other side of the soul to pop up its image with all its feminine beauty. II In November 1805, Prince Vasili had to go to the revision in the four provinces. He had made for himself this appointment in order to visit at the same time in their upset estates, and taking with him (at the location of his regiment) son Anatole together to call him to Prince Nikolai Andreyevich Bolkonsky in order to marry his son to the daughter of a wealthy the old man. But before departure and these new cases, Prince Vasili had to decide the case with Pierre, who, however, recently spent whole days at home, t. E. Prince Vasili, with whom he lived, was funny, excited and stupid (as it should be in love) in the presence of Helen, but still did not make a bid. «Tout ca est bel et bon, mais il faut que ca finisse», [Everything is good, but we need it to finish,] - said to myself one morning Prince Vasili with a sigh of sadness, knowing that Pierre so indebted to him (well, yes Christ is with him!), not very well received in the case. "Youth ... frivolity ... well, let God be with him - Prince Vasili thought with pleasure feeling his kindness: - mais il faut, que ca finisse. After tomorrow Loliny birthday party, I'll call someone, and if he does not understand what he has to do, then it will have my business. Yes, my business. I - father "Pierre month and a half after an evening of Anna Pavlovna and the ensuing sleepless, anxious night in which he decided that his marriage to Helen would be a misfortune, and that he should avoid it and go, Pierre after the decision not to move from Prince Vasili and horror felt that every day it is more and more in the eyes of the people associated with it, that it can not in any way to return to his former views on it, that he could not and put it down, it would be terrible, but what he would tie her own destiny. Maybe he would abstain, but not a day to Prince Basil (whose reception was rarely) have not been in the evening, which was to be Pierre, if he did not want to upset the overall pleasure and deceive the expectations of all. Prince Vasili in the rare moments when he was home, he passed Pierre pulled his arm down, absently substituted a to him for a kiss shaven, wrinkled cheek and said, or "tomorrow" or "for dinner, and then I see you again" or "I remain for you" and so on. n. But despite the fact that, when Prince Vasili remained for Pierre (as he said), he did not speak with him two words, Pierre did not feel able to deceive his expectations . Every day he told himself all one and the same thing: "It is necessary, finally, to understand it and to realize: who is she? I was wrong before or is now wrong? No, she is not stupid; No, she is a beautiful girl! - he said to himself sometimes. - Never in anything she does not make mistakes, she never said anything stupid. She says little, but what she says is always plain and simple. So she is not stupid. She never was embarrassed and did not hesitate. So it is not a bad woman! "He happened often with her to begin to reason, to think aloud, and each time she responded to him on either a short, but incidentally the remark shows that it is not interested in, or silent smile and eyes that are perceptible all showed Pierre her superiority. She was right, recognizing to all the arguments nonsense in comparison with that smile. She addressed him always with a happy, trusting, to him alone to treat a smile that was something significant that there was a total smile adorning her face always. Pierre knew that everyone is waiting only that he finally said one word, stepped over a certain line, and he knew that sooner or later he will cross through it; but some strange horror covered it with the thought of this terrible step. A thousand times in the course of one and a half months, during which he felt further and further drawn into the feared before him abyss, Pierre said to himself: "What is it? Need commitment! I did not have to change it? "He wanted to decide, but the horror felt that it was not he in this case determined that he knew in himself and that was really it. Pierre was one of those people who are strong only when they feel quite clean. And since that day, as they possessed the feeling of desire that he has experienced over the snuffbox at Anna Pavlovna, nesoznannoe sense of guilt that desire paralizirovalo his determination. The name day of Ellen Prince Vasili dined small society of people closest, as they say the princess, family and friends. All of these family members and friends were given to feel that that day should decide the fate of the birthday girl. Guests were seated at dinner. Princess Kuragin, massive, once beautiful, respectable woman sitting on the master's place. On both sides of it were the guests of honor - the old general, his wife, Anna Pavlovna Scherer; at the end of the table were less mature and distinguished guests, and there were domestic, Pierre and Helene - nearby. Prince Vasili did not have dinner he walked about around the table, in a merry mood, sitting down to the fact that another of the guests. Everyone he talked careless and pleasant word, except Pierre and Helene, whose presence he had not noticed, it seemed. Prince Vasili enlivened all. Brightly lit wax candles, glittering silver and crystal tableware, clothes and ladies gold and silver epaulettes; servants scurried around the table in a red coat; heard the sound of knives, glasses, plates and sounds of the bustling said a few conversations around the table. Could hear the old chamberlain at one end of an old woman, Baroness assured in their ardent love for her and her laughter; on the other - the story of the failure is a certain Maria Viktorovna. In the middle of the table, Prince Vasili concentrated around themselves listeners. He told the ladies, with a playful smile on his lips, the last - on Wednesday - a meeting of the State Council, which has been received and read by Sergey Kuzmich Vyazmitinovym, the new St. Petersburg military governor-general, then famous rescript of the Emperor Alexander Pavlovich from the army, in which the Emperor, addressing Sergei Kuzmich said that on all sides it receives allegations of devotion of the people, and that the statement of St. Petersburg are especially pleased him that he is proud of the honor to be the head of such a nation, and will try to be worthy of it. This rescript began with the words: Sergey Kuzmich! On all sides reach me rumors, etc. -.. So did and did not go further than "Sergey Kuzmich '? - asked one lady. - Yes, yes, any hair - laughing replied Prince Vasili. - Sergey Kuzmich ... from all sides. On all sides, Sergei Kuzmich ... Poor Sergey Vyazmitinov could not go on. I already told Preshpekt disperse. The prince bowed his head and walked up to the porch. "Thank you, God - thought manager - swept a cloud!" - it was hard to Drive Your Excellency, - added the manager. - How could hear, your Excellency, that the Minister will welcome your excellency? The prince turned to the manager and frowning eyes stared at him. - What? Minister? What is the minister? Who told? - he spoke in his shrill, harsh voice. - For the Princess, my daughter is not cleared, and for the minister! I have no ministers! - Your Excellency, I thought ... - You thought! - cried the prince, all haste and loose pronouncing words. - You thought ... Robbers! scoundrels! I will teach you to believe - and raising his stick he swung it at Alpatych would hit if the manager would not unwittingly strayed from the punch. - I think! Scoundrels! - he cried hastily. But, despite the fact that Alpatych, was frightened of his audacity - to deviate from the strike, he approached the prince, bowed humbly before him his bald head, or maybe it is from this prince, still shouting: "scoundrels! scatter the road! "I am not picked up a stick and other times ran into the room. Before lunch, the princess and the m-lle Bourienne, who knew that the prince was not in the spirit, stood waiting for him: m-lle Bourienne with a beaming face that said: "I do not know anything, I'm the same as always," and Princess Maria - a pale, frightened, with downcast eyes. The hardest thing for Princess Mary was that she knew that in these cases it is necessary to do as m-lle Bourime, but could not do it. She thought: "I will do so, did not seem to notice, he will think that I have no sympathy for him; I will do so, I'm very boring and not in the spirit, he will say (as it happened), I hung up the nose ", and so on. n. The prince looked at her daughter's frightened face and snorted. - Dr. ... or stupid ...! - he said. "And that is not! she gossiped too, "he thought to the little princess, who was not in the dining room. - Princess And where? - he asked. - Hiding ...? - It is not very well - cheerfully smiling, she said m-lle Bourienne - it will not work. It is clear in its position. - Hmm! ahem! ki! ki! - said the prince, and sat down at the table. Plate it seemed not clean; he pointed to the spot and threw it. Tikhon caught it and handed the bartender. The little princess was not unwell; but to the extent he feared irresistible prince that, hearing about how he's not in the spirit, she decided not to go. - I'm afraid for the baby - she said m-lle Bourienne, - God knows what you can do with fear. In general, the little princess lived in Bald Hills is constantly under the fear and antipathy to the old prince, which she did not realize, because fear so prevalent, that she could not feel her. On the part of the prince, too, it was the antipathy, but it drowns contempt. Princess, obzhivshis at Bald Hills, especially fell in love with m-lle Bourienne, spent her days, asked her to sleep with him, and with her father in law is often talked about and judged him. - Il nous arrive du monde, mon prince, [we go to visit the prince. ] - I said m-lle Bourienne, her rosy hands deploying a white napkin. - Son excellence le rrince Kouraguine avec son fils, a ce que j'ai entendu dire? [His Excellency Prince Kuragin with his son, as I have heard? ] - she said questioningly. - Um ... this excellence boy ... I defined it in college, - he said the prince offended. - A son, why, I can not understand. Lizaveta Karlovna Princess and Princess Mary can know; I do not know what he was carrying this son here. I do not need. - And he looked at the reddened daughter. - Unhealthy, or what? Minister of fear, as now this idiot Alpatych said. - No, mon pere. [Father. ] No matter how badly hit m-lle Bourienne on the subject, she stopped and chatted about the greenhouses, the beauty of a new blossoming of the flower, and the prince after the soup softened. After dinner, he went to the daughter. The little princess was sitting at a small table and chatted with Masha, the maid. She turned pale, seeing-in-law. The little princess is very changed. Rather, it was bad, rather than good, now. Cheeks drooped lip stood up, his eyes were covered from top to bottom. - Yes, the severity of any, - she replied to inPoll prince that she feels. - Do you need something? - No, merci, mon pere. [Thank you, sir. ] - Well, well, well. He went out and came to ofitsiantskoy. Alpatych, head bent, standing in ofitsiantskoy. - pelted the road? - cast aside, your excellency; excuse me, for God's sake, one stupidity. Prince interrupted him, laughing his unnatural laugh. - Well, well, well. He held out his hand, which he kissed Alpatych, and went into his study. In the evening, Prince Vasili arrived. He was greeted on Preshpekt (so-called prospectus) coachmen and waiters shouting it was driven sleigh and sled to the wing on the snow-covered road on purpose. Prince Vasili and Anatole had separate rooms reserved. Anatole sat, removing coat and leaning on her hands on her hips in front of a table on which he corner, smiling, gazing absently stared her beautiful big eyes. On all his life he watched the continuous entertainment that someone so why is bound to arrange for it. Just now he was looking at his trip to the evil old man and an ugly rich heiress. All this could get out, he supposed, a very good and funny. And why not get married, if she is rich? It never hurts thought Anatole. He shaved, perfumed with care and panache, make it a habit, and with him a born good-natured expression triumphant, holding aloft a beautiful head, entered the room to her father. About Prince Vasili bustled his two valet, putting him; he excitedly looked around and nodded cheerfully which were part of his son as if he said: "So, so me and you have to!" - No, no joke, sir, it is very ugly? BUT? - he asked, as if continuing a conversation, not once run by during the trip. - Totally. Nonsense! The main thing - try to be respectful and prudent with the old prince. - If he will swear, I'll go, - said Anatole. - I have these old people can not stand. BUT? - Remember that for you depends on everything. At this time in the girls she was not only famous for the arrival of the minister and his son, but the appearance of both of them has already been described in detail. Princess Mary was sitting alone in his room, and tried in vain to overcome his inner excitement. "Why did they write, why Lisa told me about it? After all, this can not be! - she said to herself, glancing in the mirror. - How do I get into the living room? If he even liked me, I could not be with him now of itself. " One thought about the look of her father led her in horror. The little princess and m-lle Bourienne have already received all the necessary information from the maid Masha about how fresh-faced, black-browed, handsome was the ministerial son, and how papa raped leg wires to the stairs, and he, like an eagle, walking three steps , za ran it. After receiving this information, the little princess with m-lle Bourienne, still audible from the hallway by their lively-talking voices, came into the room princess. - Ils sont arrives, Marieie, [They came, Marie,] you know? - said the little princess, waddling his belly and hard down on the chair. She was no longer in that blouse, which was sitting in the morning, and it was one of her best dresses; her head was carefully removed, and on the face of it was excitement, not hide, however, descended and pomertvevshih shape face. In that outfit, in which it can be common in societies in St. Petersburg, it has been noticeable how much she lost her looks. On the m-lle Bourienne also has quietly appeared some improvement outfits that gave her a pretty, fresh one person more attractive. - Eh bien, et vous restez comme vous etes, chere princesse? - she said. - On va venir annoncer, que ces messieurs sont au salon; il faudra descendre, et vous ne faites pas un petit brin de toilette! [Well, you stay in what were, Princess? Who will come to say that they came. I'll have to go down, but you at least a little bit dressed up! ] The little princess rose from her chair, called the maid, and hurriedly and merrily began to come up with an outfit for Princess Mary, and give effect to it. Princess Mary felt insulted in self-esteem that the promised visit to her groom worried her, and she was even more offended by the fact that both her friend and did not expect that it could be otherwise. Tell them how she was ashamed for myself and for them, it is meant to give his excitement; In addition to abandon the dressing up that offer it, would lead to lengthy jokes and infusion. She flushed, her beautiful eyes grew dim, her face mottled and so ugly expression of the victim, often dwell on her face, she gave herself to the power of m-lle Bourienne and Lisa. Both women quite sincerely cared about, to make her beautiful. She was so ugly that no one of them could not to come the idea of ​​rivalry with her; so they are perfectly sincere, so naive and firm conviction women that dress can make the face beautiful, set to its dressing. - No, really, ma bonne amie, [my good friend,] this dress is not good, - said Lisa, a distance sideways glance at the princess. - Veli file, you there is Masaka. Right! Well, because it can be life fate is being decided. And it's too light, not good, not bad! Bad it was not a dress, but the face and whole figure of Princess, but this did not feel the m-lle Bourienne and the little princess; they all seemed to be that if a blue ribbon to attach to the hair combed up, and pull the blue scarf with brown dress and so on. n., then everything will be fine. They forgot that the frightened face and the figure could not be changed, because they are neither modifies the frame, and an ornament of the person, the face itself was pathetic and ugly. After two or three changes, which dutifully obeyed Princess Mary, at that moment, it was combed upwards (hairstyle, completely modify and port her face), in a blue scarf and Masaka smart dress, little princess twice walked around her little hand then straightened her dress, it was covered in a scarf and looked up, his head bowed, then one, then the other. - No, it can not be - she said emphatically, clasping her hands. - Non, Marie, decidement ca ne vous va pas. Je vous aime mieux dans votre petite robe grise de tous les jours. Non, de grace, faites cela pour moi. [No, Marie, strongly it does not go to you. I like you better in your daily a gray dress: please do it for me. ] Katya - she said the maid - Bring a gray princess dress and look, m-lle Bourienne, I'll make it, - she said with a smile of anticipation artistic joy. But when Kate brought the required dress, Princess Mary sat still all in front of a mirror, looking at his face in the mirror and saw that her eyes are tears, and that her mouth was trembling, preparing to sob. - Voyons, chere princesse, - said m-lle Bourienne, - encore un petit effort. [Well, princess, even a small effort. ] The little princess, taking the dress of the maid hand, approached the Princess Mary. - No, now we'll do it just cute - she said. Her voice, m-lle Bourienne and Katie that something laughed, merged into a cheerful babbling, like birds singing. - Non, laissez-moi, [No, leave me] - the princess said. And her voice was so seriously and suffering that babbling birds immediately fell silent. They looked at the big, beautiful eyes, full of tears and thoughts clearly and appealingly gazing at them and realized that the push is useless and even cruel. - Au moins changez de coiffure, - said the little princess. - Je vous disais, - reproachfully she said, referring to the m-lle Bourienne, - Marieie a une de ces figures, auxquelles ce genre de coiffure ne va pas du tout. Mais du tout, du tout. Changez de grace. [At least variable hairstyle. Marie is one of those persons to whom this kind of hair style does not suit at all. Variables, please. ] - Laissez-moi, laissez-moi, tout ca m'est parfaitement egal, [Leave me alone, I do not care] - the voice answered, barely retaining tears. M-lle Bourienne and the little princess had to admit to themselves that Princess. Mary in this form was very bad, worse than ever; but it was too late. She looked at them with the same expression that they knew the thoughts and expressions of sadness. Saying this does not intimidate them to Princess Mary. (This feeling she did not inspire anyone.) But they knew that when her face appeared an expression that she was silent, and unwavering in their decisions. - Vous changerez, n'est-ce pas? [You are variable, is not it? ] - Lisa said, and when Princess Mary did not say anything, Lisa left the room. Princess Mary was alone. It does not fulfill the desire of Lisa and not only changed her hairstyle, but did not look at myself in the mirror. She helplessly drooping eyes and hands, he sat quietly and thought. She presented her husband, man, strong, dominant, and it is not clear, attractive creature, transporting her suddenly in a completely different, happy world. Your child, so what she saw yesterday her daughter nurse - seemed to her in her own breast. Husband standing and tenderly looking at her and the child. "But no, this is not possible: I'm too ugly", she thought. - Come in to tea. Prince is now come, - he said from behind the door the maid's voice. She woke up and was horrified to what she thought. And before you go down, she got up, went into shaped and fixing the illuminated icon lamp black face of a large image of the Savior stood before him with folded hands a few minutes. The Princess Mary's soul was lingering doubts. Is it possible for the joy of love, earthly love for a man? The thoughts toward marriage Princess Mary dreamed and family happiness, and children, but more importantly, a strong undercurrent and her dream was to earthly love. The feeling was the stronger, the more she tried to hide it from others and even from herself. Oh, my God, - she said - how can I suppress in his heart the thought of the devil? How can I give up so good from evil thoughts, to calm your will? And as soon as she made the question of how God has answered her in her own heart: "Do not desire anything for himself; do not look, do not worry, do not be jealous. The future of people and your destiny is to be unknown to you; but live so as to be ready for anything. If it pleases God will test you in the responsibilities of marriage, be ready to do his will. " With this soothing thought (but still with hope for the fulfillment of her forbidden earthly dreams) Princess Mary sighed, crossed herself and went downstairs without thinking about her dress, nor hair nor how it will go and what will . What could all this mean in comparison with the predestination of God, without whose will not fall a single hair from a human head. IV When Princess Mary came up to the room, Prince Vasili and his son were in the living room, talking to the little princess and m-lle Bourienne. When she entered his heavy gait, walking on heels, men and m-lle Bourienne lifted, and the little princess, pointing to her men, said: Voila Marie! [Here Mary! ] Princess Mary saw everyone and saw in detail. She saw the face of Prince Vasili, for a moment seriously stop at the sight of the princess, and immediately smile and face the little princess, who was reading with curiosity on the faces of the guests the impression that they make on Marie. She saw and m-lle Bourienne with her ribbon and pretty face and lively as ever, eyes fixed on him; but she could not see him, she could only see something big, bright and beautiful, moving closer to her when she entered the room. At first, she was approached by Prince Vasili, and she kissed the bald head, leaning on her hand, and answer his words, she, on the contrary, very well remember it. Then Anatole came up to her. She still had not seen it. She only felt a gentle hand and firmly took her, and almost touched the white forehead, over which were pripomazheny beautiful brown hair. When she looked at him, he was struck by her beauty. Anatop with his right thumb of a button buttoned tunic with curved front chest, and back - back, swinging one leg of delayed and slightly bowed his head in silence, staring at the princess fun, apparently quite without thinking about it. Anatole was not resourceful, not fast and not eloquent in conversation, but he was but a precious ability to calm light and does not modify self. Shut up when we first met a man and nesamouverenny vykazhi embarrassingly conscious of the silence and the desire to find something and be wrong; but Anatole said nothing, shaking his foot, have fun watching her hair princess. It was evident that he was so relaxed he could be silent for a long time. "If anyone awkward silence, so to talk, and I do not want to," as if to say his views. In addition to the treatment of women at the Anatole was the manner that is most in women inspires curiosity, fear, and even love - the contemptuous manner of the consciousness of his own superiority. As if he had told them his views: "I know you, I know, but what you tinker? And you would be happy! "It may be that he did not think meeting with women (and even likely, that there is, because he thought very little), but that he was kind and such manner. Princess felt it, as if to show him that she did not dare to think about how to take it, she turned to the old prince. The conversation was general and lively, thanks to the voice and sponge with a mustache, rises above the white teeth, the little princess. She met Prince Vasili with the reception jokes, which is often used chatty, funny people, and which consists in the fact that between the person with whom to treat, and a suggested some long-established jokes and funny, partly not terrific, fun memories whereas there is no such memories, as they were not among the little princess and Prince Vasili. Prince Vasili readily succumbed to this tone; little princess drew in the memory never-funny incidents and Anatole, whom she hardly knew. M-lle Bourienne also share these common memories, and even Princess Mary with pleasure and felt himself dragged into a fun memory. - That, at least, we are now fully use you, my dear prince, - he said the little princess, of course in French, Prince Vasili, - it's not like our evenings in by Annette, where you always run away; remember cette chere Annette? [Sweet Annette? ] - And, yes, I have no politics, Go govoritpro like Annette! - And our tea table? - Oh yeah! - Why you have never been at Annette? - I asked the little princess in Anatolia. - I know, I know, - she said with a wink, - your brother Hippolyte told me about your case. - ABOUT! - She shook her finger at him. - Back in Paris know your pranks! - And he, Hippolytus, did not tell you? - said Prince Vasili (referring to his son and grabbed the arm of the princess, as if she wanted to run away, and he barely managed to hold on to it) - but he did not tell you, as he himself, Hippolytus, dried up on the cute princess and her le mettait a la porte? [Threw him out of the house? ] - Oh! C'est la perle des femmes, princesse! [Oh! This gem of women, Princess! ] - he said to the princess. On its part, m-lle Bourienne not miss the chance to start with the word Paris is also in the general conversation memories. She allowed herself to ask if Anatole left Paris for a long time, and how he liked this city. Anatole answered the Frenchwoman very readily and, smiling, looking at her, talked to her about her homeland. Seeing pretty Bourienne, Anatole decided that here, at Bald Hills, it will be bored. "It's not bad! - he thought, looking around her, - very pretty this demoiselle de compagn. [companion. ] I hope that she will take her with him when he comes out of me - he thought, - la petite est gentille ». [Baby - sweet. ] The old prince dressed leisurely in his study, frowning and pondering what he should do. The arrival of these visitors annoyed him. "What am I to Prince Vasili and his son? Prince Vasili boaster, empty, well, good son should be, "he grumbled to himself. His annoyed that the arrival of the guests raised in his mind unsettled, constantly drowned question - the question about whom the old prince always deceived himself. The question was whether he ever dare to part with Princess Mary and give it to her husband. Prince never explicitly dare to ask yourself this question, knowing beforehand what he would say in all fairness, and justice is contrary to more than a feeling, and all possibilities of his life. Life without Princess Mary Prince Nikolai Andreyevich, despite the fact that he seemed to be a little treasure it was unthinkable. "And what she marry? - he thought - probably be miserable. Lisa Wong for Andrew (better husband now seems hard to find), and unless she was satisfied with their lot? And who will take it out of love? Ugly, embarrassing. Will take over the connection, for wealth. And I do not live on the shelf? Even happier! "So thinking, dressing, Prince Nikolai Andreyevich, and with it all to postpone the question demanded an immediate solution. Prince Vasili had brought his son, apparently with the intention of making an offer, and probably today or tomorrow will require a direct answer. The name of the position in the light of the decent. "Well, I do not mind, - said the prince to himself - but even if it will be worth it. That's what we see. " - This is what we see - he said aloud. - This is what we see. And he, as always, vigorous steps into the living room, quickly looked through the eyes of all, notice and change the little princess dress and ribbon Bourienne and ugly hairstyle Princess Mary and smiles Bourienne and Anatolia, and the loneliness of his princess in the general conversation. "Remove like a fool! - he thought, angrily looking at her daughter. - no shame: but he did not want to know and "He went to Prince Vasili!. - Well, hello, hello; glad to see. which happened to his face in those moments when his dry hands clenched into a fist in frustration because Princess Mary did not understand the arithmetic problem, and he stood up, left her in a low voice repeated several times the same words. He immediately set to work and began the conversation by saying "you". - I made a proposition about you - he said, smiling unnaturally. - I think you have guessed - he continued - that Prince Vasili arrived here and brought with him his pupil (for some reason Prince Nikolai Andreyevich called Anatole pupil) is not for my beautiful eyes. Yesterday I made a proposition about you. And as you know my rules, I treated you. - How do I understand you, mon pere? - said the princess, turning pale and blushing. - How to understand! - shouted angry father. - Prince Vasili finds you to his taste for the bride and makes you a proposition for his pupil. Here's how to understand. What does it mean?! ... And I ask you. - I do not know about you, mon pere, - whisper said the princess. - I? I? what am I, then? I leave something behind. I will not marry. What do you? Here it is desirable to know. The princess saw that her father looked unkindly on this matter, but it at the same moment had the idea that it is now or ever will decide the fate of her life. She lowered her eyes, not to see the sight, under whose influence she felt that she could not think, and could out of habit only to obey, and said: - I want only one thing - to fulfill your will, - she said - but if would be my desire it was necessary to express the ... She has not had time to finish. Prince interrupted. - And the great - he shouted. - He'll take the dowry, but the way capture the m-lle Bourienne. That would be his wife, and you ... Prince stopped. He noticed the impression made by these words at his daughter. She lowered her head and was about to cry. - Well, well, kidding, kidding, - he said. - Remember one thing, Princess: I hold of those rules, that the girl has every right to choose. And I give you freedom. Remember one thing: your decision depends on the happiness of your life. About me nothing to say. - Yes, I do not know ... mon pere. - Needless to say! He is told, it is not only on you, on whom you want to marry; and you're free to choose ... Come to Me, deliberately and in an hour come to me and tell him yes or no. I know you'll be praying. Well, perhaps pray. Only better think. Go. Yes or no, yes or no, yes or no! - he shouted at a time, as the Princess, in a daze, stagger already left the office. Its fate decided and happily decided. But the father said of m-lle Bourienne, - this hint was terrible. Not true, say, but still it was terrible, she could not help but think about it. She was walking straight ahead through the winter garden, seeing nothing and hearing, when suddenly a familiar whisper m-lle Bourienne woke her. She looked up and around the corner from you saw Anatole, who embraced the Frenchwoman and whispering something to her. Anatole with a terrible expression on his handsome face looked at Princess Mary and not released in the first second waist m-lle Bourienne, who had not seen her. "Who's here? What for? Wait! "As if it was a person Anatole. Princess Mary looked at them in silence. She could not understand it. Finally, m-lle Bourienne screamed and ran away, and with a cheerful smile Anatole bowed to Princess Mary, as though inviting her to laugh at this strange case, and with a shrug, went to the door that led to his half. An hour later, Tikhon came to call Princess Mary. He called her to the prince, and added that Prince Vasili Sergeyevich there. The princess, while Tikhon came, sat on the couch in her room and held in my arms crying m-lla Bourienne. Princess Mary gently stroked her hair. Beautiful eyes princess, with all their former calm radiance and looked with tender love and regret at the pretty face m-lle Bourienne. - Non, princesse, je suis perdue pour toujours dans votre coeur, [No, Princess, I am forever lost your location] - I said m-lle Bourienne. - Pourquoi? Je vous aime plus, que jamais, - he said Princess Mary, - et je tacherai de faire tout ce qui est en mon pouvoir pour votre bonheur. [Why not? I love you more than ever, and will try to make for your happiness all that is in my power. ] - Mais vous me meprisez, vous si pure, vous ne comprendrez jamais cet egarement de la passion. Ah, ce n'est que ma pauvre mere ... [But you are so pure, you despise me; you will never understand this passion passion. Oh, my poor mother ...] - Je comprends tout, [I understand everything,] - Princess Mary replied, smiling sadly. - Calm down, my friend. I will go to my father, - she said, and left. Prince Vasili, crooking a high pace, with the snuff-box in his hands, as if utterly sentimental, as if he regretted and laughing at his sensibility, sat with a smile of emotion on his face, when she came Princess Mary. He hurriedly lifted a pinch of snuff to his nose. - Ah, ma bonne, ma bonne, [Oh, dear, dear. ] - he said, standing up and taking her by both hands. He sighed, and added: - Le sort de mon fils est en vos mains. Decidez, ma bonne, ma chere, ma douee Marieie qui j'ai toujours aimee, comme ma fille. [The fate of my son in your hands. Decide, my dear, my dear, my gentle Marie, whom I always liked, like daughter. ] He went out. Real tears came to his eyes. - Fr ... fr ... - snorted Prince Nikolai Andreyevich. - Prince on behalf of his pupil ... son, you make a proposition. Do you want to or not be the wife of Prince Anatole Kuragin? You say yes or no! - he cried - and then I hold the right to say his opinion. Yes, my opinion and only my opinion - added Prince Nikolai Andreyevich, addressing Prince Vasili and answering his imploring expression. - Yes or no? - My desire, mon pere, never leave you, never to share his life with yours. I do not want to get married, - she said firmly, looking at her beautiful eyes at Prince Vasili and at her father. - nonsense, foolishness! Blah, blah, blah! - frowning cried Prince Nikolai Andreyevich, took his daughter's hand, bent down to her and kissed her, but ducking his forehead against her forehead touched her hand and squeezed so that he was holding, she winced and gasped. Prince Vasili rose. - Ma chere, je vous dirai, que c'est un moment que je n'oublrai jamais, jamais; mais, ma bonne, est-ce que vous ne nous donnerez pas un peu d'esperance de toucher ce coeur si bon, si genereux. Dites, que peut-etre ... L'avenir est si grand. Dites: peut-etre. [My dear, I'll tell you what this moment I will never forget, but, my goodness, let us at least a small hope of the possibility to touch the heart, so kind and generous. Say, maybe ... The future is so great. Say, maybe. ] - Prince, what I said is all that is in my heart. I am grateful for the honor, but will never be the wife of your son. - Well, it's over, my dear. I am very glad to see you, very happy to see you. Come to Me, Princess, go, - said the old prince. - Very, very glad to see you - he repeated, embracing Prince Vasili. "My vocation else - thought to himself, Princess Mary, my calling - to be happier than others happiness, happiness of love and sacrifice. And that to me is not worth it, I will do a poor happiness Ame. She is so passionate about it. She so passionately repents. I'll do anything to get her married to him. If he is not rich, I'll give her money, I will ask the Father, I ask Andrew. I'll be happy when she would be his wife. It is so unfortunate, a stranger, alone, without help! And my God, how passionately she likes, if she could forget herself. Maybe I would have done the same! ... "thought Princess Mary. VI Long Rostovs had news of little Nicholas; Only in mid-winter count was handed a letter to the address that he found his son's hand. After receiving the letter, the Count frightened and hurriedly, trying not to be noticed, on tiptoe, ran into his office, locked the door and began to read. Anna M., knowing (as she knew everything that was going on in the house) on the receipt of the letter, in a low pitch count went to and found him with a letter in his hands and wept together laughing. Anna M., despite correct affairs, continued to live in Rostov. - Mon bon ami? - questioning, sad and willing participation of all said Anna Mikhaylovna. Count cried even more. "Nikolushka ... letter ... hit ... to ... was ... ma shere ... wounded ... my darling ... countess ... an officer made ... thank God ... Countess how to say? ..." Anna Mikhaylovna sat down beside him and wiped his tears with a handkerchief from his eyes, with letters , the dropped them, and their tears, read the letter, the Count reassured and decided that before lunch and before the tea she will prepare the countess, and after tea to announce all, if God would help her. All the dinner Anna Mikhaylovna talked about rumors of war, of little Nicholas; I asked twice when the last letter was received from him, even though she knew it before, and I noticed that very easily could be, and today received a letter. Whenever at these hints Countess began to worry and anxiety to glance at the graph, then Anna Mikhaylovna, Anna M. thus imperceptibly drove conversation on minor items. Natasha, from the whole family above all a gifted ability to feel intonations shades, attitudes and facial expressions, from the beginning of dinner pricked ears and knew that there was anything between her father and Anna Mikhaylovna and anything concerning his brother, and Anna M. prepares. Despite his courage (Natasha knew how sensitive was her mother everything that concerned the news of little Nicholas), she decided at dinner to make the issue and by concern for the dinner did not eat anything and spun in his chair, not listening to the comments of his governess. After dinner, she rushed headlong to catch up with Anna Mikhaylovna and in the sitting room with a running start jumped on her neck. - Auntie, darling, tell me, what is it? - Do not worry, my friend. - No, my dear, darling, honey, peach, I do not otstany, I know that you know. Anna Mikhaylovna shook her head. - Voua etes une fine mouche, mon enfant, [vostrushka you, my child. ]- she said. - From a letter Nikolenka? Probably! - Natasha cried after reading a positive answer in the person of Anna Mikhaylovna. - But for God's sake, be careful, you know how it can affect your maman. - I will, I will, but tell me. Can you tell? Well, I'm going to say. Anna M. in a few words told Natasha contents of the letter with the condition not to tell anyone. Honest, honorable word - the cross, said Natasha, - nobody will say - and immediately ran up to Sonya. - Nicholas ... wounded ... a letter ... - she said solemnly and joyfully. - Nicolas! - uttered only Sonya, pale instantly. Natasha, seeing the impression made on the news of Sonia wound brother, for the first time felt the whole sorrowful side of the news. She rushed to Sonya, hugged her and wept. - A little bit wounded, but an officer; he is now in good health, he writes, - she said through tears. - Here we see that all you women - crybaby - said Petya, decisive steps pacing the large room. - I am very happy and really, really happy that my brother so distinguished. All you nurse! You do not understand anything. - Natasha smiled through her tears. - You did not read the letter? - asked Sonia. - Do not read, but she said she did it go, and that he was an officer ... - Thank God - said Sonya, crossing herself. - But, maybe she cheated you. Come to maman. Petya paced the room in silence. - If only I was there little Nicholas, I would be even more of these Frenchmen killed - he said - they are disgusting! I would beat them so that a bunch of them would have done, - continued Peter. - Shut up, Pete, what a fool! ... - I'm not the fool, and fools are those who cry from trivia, - said Petya. - You remember him? - after a moment of silence Natasha suddenly he asked. Sonia smiled: "Is Nicolas remember?" - No, Sonia, whether you remember him so well to keep in mind that everything in mind - with diligent gesture Natasha said, evidently wishing to give to the words of the highest importance. - And I remember Nikolenka, I remember - she said. - And I do not remember Boris. I do not remember ... - What? You do not remember Boris? - Sonia asked with surprise. - Not that I do not remember - I know what it is, but not remember Nikolenka. It, I close my eyes and remember, and Boris is not (she closed her eyes), so there is no - nothing! - Ah, Natasha, - said Sonia, enthusiastically and seriously looking at his girlfriend as if she considered it unworthy to hear what she was going to say, as if she was saying it to someone else with whom you can not joke. - I loved your brother again, and no matter what happened to him, to me, I will never stop loving him all my life. Natasha, surprised, curious eyes looked at Sonya, and was silent. She felt that what she told Sonia was true that there was such love, about which said Sonya; Natasha but nothing like this has not yet experienced. She believed that it could be, but did not understand. - You write it? - she asked. Sonia thought. The question of how to write to Nicolas and whether you want to write and how to write, was the question tormented her. Now, when he was already an officer and a wounded hero, whether it was good of her to remind him of himself, as if that obligation, which he took over in respect of it. - I do not know; I think if he writes - and I write - blushing, she said. - And do not be ashamed to write to him? Sonia smiled. - Not. - And I'm ashamed to write to Boris, I will not write. - Yes, why should a shame Oh, I do not know. Awkward, embarrassing. - I know why it would be a shame, - said Petya, offended by Natasha's first remark - because she was in love with this thick glasses (called Peter his namesake, the new Count Bezukhov); Now the singer is in love with it (Peter talked about the Italians, Natasha's singing teacher) Behold her and ashamed. - Peter, you're stupid, - said Natasha. - Do not be silly you, my dear, - said the nine-year-Petia, just as if it was the old foreman. The countess was prepared by Anna Mikhaylovna's hints at dinner time. After retiring to her, she was sitting on a chair, she kept her eyes on the miniature portrait of his son, is embedded in the snuffbox, and tears in her eyes navertyvalis. Anna M. letter tiptoed to the room of the Countess stopped. - Do not go - she said the old count, who was walking behind her - after - and closed the door behind him. Earl put his ear to the castle and began to listen. First he heard the sound of indifferent speeches, then a sound of the voice of Anna Mikhailovna, says a long speech, and then scream, then silence, then again both voices spoke together with glad intonations, and then footsteps, and Anna M. opened the door for him. At Anna Mikhaylovna's face was proud expression operator, graduated from a difficult amputation and introducing the audience to the fact that she could appreciate his art. - C'est fait! [It is done! ] - she said the count, solemn gesture pointing to the Countess, who was holding in one hand the snuffbox with a portrait in the other - the letter and pressed his lips to it, then the other. On seeing the count, she stretched out her arms to him, embraced his bald head and a bald head through again, looked at the letter and portrait, and again in order to press them to his lips, gently pushed his bald head. Vera, Natasha, Sonya, and Petya entered the room and began reading. The letter was briefly described the campaign and two battles in which participated Nikolushka production in the officers and said that he kissed the hands of maman and papa is, asking for their blessing and kissed Vera, Natasha, Petya. In addition, he bows mr Shelingu, and m-ME SCO and the nurse, and, moreover, asks to kiss the dear Sonya, whom he loves all the same and that all as recalls. Hearing this, Sonya blushed so that tears came to her eyes. And, unable to withstand noticed her eyes, she ran into the hall, ran away, swam and balloon blowing her dress, flushed and smiling, sat on the floor. I cried the Countess. - What are you crying, maman? - said Vera. - In everything he writes, should be happy and not cry. It was quite right, but the count and countess, and Natasha - all reproachfully looked at her. "And who is this out!" Thought Countess. NikoMy letter was read hundreds of times, and those who were considered worthy to listen to him, had come to the countess, who did not release his hand. Came tutors, nannies, Dmitri, some acquaintances, and the countess reread the letter each time with a new delight and every time I open this letter new virtues in her little Nicholas. How strange, unusually, happily she was that her son - the son, who almost imperceptibly tiny members stir in itself 20 years ago, the son, whom she had quarreled with a mischievous child-graph, the son, who learned to speak first: "pear", and then "baba", that the son is now there, in a strange land, in a strange environment, a courageous warrior, alone, without the help and guidance, make it some kind of the man's case. All the world's a century of experience, indicating that the children unnoticed by cradle-made men of, did not exist for the countess. Maturing of her son in every pore of manhood was for her just as extraordinary, as it was never a million-million people, just matured. As it was not believed 20 years ago that the little creature who lived somewhere under her heart, would have screamed and began to suck the breast, and would speak, so now I could not believe it, it's the same thing could be so strong , a brave man, a model son and the people he was now, according to this letter. - What kind of calm as he describes cute! - she said, reading the narrative writing. - And what a shower! About Me nothing ... nothing! About some Denisov, and the true, brave them all. He writes nothing about their suffering. What a heart! How do I know it! And he remembered all! No one forgot. In addition, in order to tell it like it was, it was necessary to make an effort to tell just what it was. To tell the truth is very difficult; and young people are rarely capable of it. They were waiting for the story of how it all burned in the fire, beside himself, like a storm, flew to the square; how to cut one in him, chopping right and left; saber tasted meat, and he fell, exhausted, and the like. And he told them all that. In the middle of his story, while he said: "You can not imagine what a strange feeling of rabies feel during the attack," entered the room, Prince Andrew Prince Andrew, whom Boris was waiting. Prince Andrew, who was fond of patronizing attitudes towards young people, flattered by the fact that he had been approached for patronage, and well positioned to Boris, who knew how to please him the day before, wanted to fulfill the desire of the young man. Sent with papers from Kutuzov to the Tsarevich, he went to the young man, hoping to catch him alone. Upon entering the room and seeing telling the military adventures of the Army Hussar (sort of people who could not stand Prince Andrew), he gently smiled Boris grimaced, squinted at Rostov and bowed slightly, wearily and lazily sat on the sofa. He was unpleasant, he was in bad company. Rostov flushed, realizing this. But it was him anyway: it was a stranger. But, looking at Boris, he saw that he seemed ashamed of the army hussar. Despite the unpleasant mocking tone of Prince Andrew, in spite of the contempt, which with its army fighting point of view, Rostov had all these adyutantikam a staff, which, obviously, and reckoned entered, Rostov felt confused, blushed, and was silent. Boris asked, what news on the staff, and that, without immodesty, heard about our assumptions? - Probably will go forward - apparently not wanting to speak with outsiders more, replied Prince Andrew. Berg took the opportunity to ask a peculiar Courtesy whether to give now, as could be heard twice fodder army company commander? This Prince Andrew answered with a smile that he could not judge so important government orders, and Berg laughed happily. - About your case - Prince Andrew turned to Boris again - we'll talk after, and he looked at Rostov. - You come to me after the show, we will do everything that you can. And, looking round the room, he turned to Rostov, where the situation of children insurmountable embarrassment, rolling in anger, he did not notice udostoival, and said: - You seem to be telling about Schon Grabern deal? You were there? - I was there - angrily said Rostov, as if wanting to offend this aide. Prince Andrew noticed the condition of a hussar, and it seemed to him funny. He lightly-smiled contemptuously. - Yes! Now a lot of stories about this business! - Yes, the stories - loudly spoke Rostov, suddenly made a mad eyes looking from Boris, then Bolkonski - yes, the stories are many, but our stories - the stories of those who have been in the fire of the enemy, our stories have weight, not stories of those staff thugs who get rewards without doing anything. - By that, you assume that I belong? - calm and smiling particularly pleased said Prince Andrew. A strange feeling of exasperation and yet of respect for the calm of this figure was connected at this time in Rostov's soul. - I'm not talking about you - he said - I do not know you and, frankly, I do not want to know. I'm talking in general about the staff. - And I'll tell you what - the authorities with a calm voice interrupted Prince Andrew. - Do you want to insult me, and I am ready to agree with you that it's very easy to do, if you do not have enough self-respect; but agree that the time and place for this very badly chosen. The other day we all have to be on a large, more serious duel, and besides, Drubetskoy, who says he's your old friend, not at all to blame for the fact that my face had the misfortune you do not like it. However, - he said, getting up - you know my name and you know where to find me; but do not forget - he added - I do notI think not at all himself or insulted you, and my advice as a person older than you, leave this matter without consequences. So on Friday, after the show, I'm waiting for you, Drubetskoy; bye - he concluded Prince Andrew and left, bowing to both. Rostov remembered that he had to answer only when he had already left. And he was even more angry because I forgot to say it. Rostov immediately ordered to bring his horse and dry leave of Boris, I went to him. Is it tomorrow to go to headquarters and call this breaking adjutant or, in fact, leave this thing right? It was the question that tormented him all the way. He angrily thought about how to how to be happy, he saw the fright of this small, poor and proud man under his gun, then he felt with surprise that of all the people he knew, no one had he so did not want to be your friend as it hated it adyutantika. VIII The next day goodbye with Rostov Boris was views of the Austrian and Russian troops as fresh, coming from Russia, and those who had returned from a trip with Kutuzov. Both the Emperor, with the Russian crown prince and heir to the Austrian Archduke, did the review of the Union 80 titysyachnoy army. From early in the morning we began to move smartly polished and cleaned troops lining up on the front of the fortress. That moved thousands of feet and bayonets with flying colors and the command officers stopped were wrapped and built at intervals, bypassing other such mass infantry in other uniforms; the dimensional and tramp saber sounded elegant cavalry in blue, red, green sewn uniforms with musicians embroidered in front, on a black, red, gray horses; then, stretching with its brass sound quivered on a gun carriage, scrubbing, shiny guns and with their smell Palnikov, crawling between the infantry and cavalry, artillery and puts on the destination. Not only the generals in full dress uniform, with overtensioned impossibly thick and thin waists and krasnevshimi, backed collars, necks, scarves and all orders; not only pripomazhennye, dressy officers, but every soldier - with fresh, washed and shaven face, and to the utmost brilliance scrubbing ammunition, every horse groomed so that, like satin, shining on her hair, and hair to hair lay primochennaya Grivko - all felt that something is done laughing, a significant and solemn. Each general and the soldier felt his own insignificance, aware of being a grain of sand in the sea of ​​people, and together felt its power, recognizing ourselves as part of this immense whole. From early morning began strenuous efforts and the efforts, and at 10 o'clock it's all in the correct order. On a huge field of steel series. Army was stretched all three lines. Front cavalry, artillery behind, even behind the infantry. Between each row of troops it was like a street. Sharply separated from one another by three parts of this army combat Kutuzov (in which on the right side in the front line were pavlogradtsy), came from Russian Army and the Guards regiments, and the Austrian army. But all were under one line, under the command of one and the same order. As the wind swept the leaves excited whisper, "go! go! "were heard frightened voices, and all the troops ran wave bustle final preparations. Ahead of Olmutz seemed to move the group. And at the same time, although the day was windless, light wind stream ran through the army and almost hesitated weathervanes peak and flowing banners, tattered on your shafts. It seemed that the army itself that a slight movement expressed their joy at the approach of the sovereigns. I heard a voice: "Attention!" Then, like a rooster at dawn, the voice repeated in different parts. And everything was quiet. In the dead silence was heard the tramp of horses only. It was a suite emperors. Sovereigns arrived at the flank and there was the sound of the first trumpet cavalry regiment played the general march. It seemed that this is not the trumpeters were playing, and the army itself, rejoicing approximation of the sovereign, of course was making these sounds. Because of these sounds distinctly heard a young, gentle voice of the Emperor Alexander. He said, greeting, and the first regiment shouted: Hurray! so deafening, long lasting, happy that the people themselves were terrified size and power of the masses, they were. Rostov, standing in the forefront of the army Kutuzov, to which the first arrived at the emperor, had the same feeling, which had every man of the army - a sense of self-forgetfulness, a proud consciousness of power and a passionate attraction to him who was the cause of this celebration. He felt that one word of this man depended on the fact that the entire bulk of this (and it is associated with it - a tiny grain of sand) would have gone through fire and water, to the crime, death or the greatest heroism, and because of that he could not help but tremble and freeze at the sight of the approaching word. - Hurray! Hurray! Hurray! - resounded from all sides, and one regiment after another took the Emperor sounds general march; then Hurray! ... General march again Hurray! and Hurray !! which still intensifying and coming, merged into a deafening rumble. While not yet approached the Emperor, each regiment in its silent and motionless seemed lifeless body; Only compared to him the emperor, the regiment was animated and thundered, joining the roar of the whole of the line, which has already passed the emperor. When a terrible, deafening sound of those voices, in the midst of mass armies, motionless, as if petrified in their foursquare, carelessly but symmetrically and, most importantly, hundreds of riders entourage moved freely and in front of two people - the emperors. They are something completely focused restrained and passionate attention to all this mass of people. Beautiful young Emperor Alexander, in the uniform of the Guards cavalry, three-cornered hat, worn off, his pleasant face and sonorous low voice attracted the attention of the entire force. Rostov was not far from the trumpeters and from afar his sharp eyes found the emperor and watched his approach. When the Emperor approached to a distance of 20 steps and Nikolai clear up all the details, considered beautiful, young and happy face of the Emperor, he experienced a feeling of tenderness and joy, the likes of which he had not yet experienced. Everything - every line, every movement - it seemed to him charming in a sovereign. Stopped in front of the Pavlograd regiment, the emperor said something in French to the Austrian Emperor and smiled. Seeing that smile, Rostov involuntarily he began to smile and felt even stronger surge of love for his sovereign. He wanted to show something to his love for the Emperor. He knew that this was impossible, and he wanted to cry. The Emperor summoned the regimental commander and told him a few words. "Oh my God! whatever happened to me, if would have approached me lord! - Rostov thought: - I would die of happiness. " The Emperor and turned to the officers: - All those gentlemen (Rostov every word could be heard as the sound of the sky), I thank with all my heart. How to be happy has been Rostov, if I could die now for their king! - You have earned the St. George's flags and will be worthy of them. "Just die, die for it!" Thought Rostov. The Emperor has said something that did not hear the Rostov and soldiers nadsazhivaya his chest, cried: Hurray! Shouted Rostov, too, ducked to the seat that was his strength, wanting to hurt yourself by this cry, only to express fully his enthusiasm for the emperor. The Emperor stood for a few seconds against the hussars, as if he were undecided. "How could be undecided sire?" Thought Rostov, but then even this indecision appeared Rostov majestic and charming, as well as everything that made the emperor. Indecision sovereign lasted an instant. Leg sovereign, with a narrow, pointed toe boots, as worn at the time, touched the groin englizirovannoy bay mare on which he drove; the sovereign hand in white glove gathered up the reins, he set off, accompanied by randomly-sea swayed aides. On and on he drove away, stopping at other regiments, and finally, only the white plume it was seen Rostov due suites surrounding the emperors. Among the masters suite Rostov noticed Bolkonski lazy and loose sitting on a horse. Rostov recalled his yesterday's quarrel with it and submit questions should - or should not cause it. "Of course, we should not - now I thought Rostov ... - And whether it is necessary to think and talk about it in such a moment, as it is now? At the moment such a feeling of love, joy and self-sacrifice, what all our quarrels and insults !? I love all, forgive all now "thought Rostov. When the Tsar traveled almost all the regiments, the troops began to pass his ceremonial march, and the growth of the newly bought Denisov Bedouins drove in the castle of his squadron, t. E. One and completely at the sight in front of the emperor. Before reaching the Emperor, Rostov, a great rider, twice he drove his spurs Bedouin and brought him happily before the mad gait trot with which hazhival heated Bedouin. Foaming face bent to the chest, separating the tail, as if flying in the air and not touching the ground, gracefully and throwing high and alternating feet, Bedouin, too, felt the eyes of the sovereign, was excellent. Rostov himself, after covering the back foot and picked up his stomach and feeling like a piece of a horse, with a frowning but blissful face, the devil, as he said Denisov, rode past the Emperor. - Well done pavlogradtsy! - said the emperor. "Oh my God! As much as I was happy when he told me now to jump into the fire, "thought Rostov. When the parade was over, the officers, newcomers and Kutuzov began to converge in groups and began to talk about the awards, about the Austrians and their uniforms, on their front, about Bonaparte, and how it is bad will now have, especially when the suit has body Essen, and Prussia will take our side. But most of all in all circles talking about the Emperor Alexander, passed on his every word, movement and admired them. All want only one: under the leadership of the emperor rather go against the enemy. Under the command of the sovereign it was impossible not to defeat someone else, so after the show thought Rostov and most of the officers. All after the review was confident of winning more than you could be after two to win the battle. IX On the day after the show, Boris, dressed in the best uniform and naputstvuemy wishes of success from his comrade Berg went to Olmutz to Bolkonsky, wanting to take advantage of his kindness, and give himself the best position, particularly the position of adjutant with an important face, which seemed to him particularly-attractive in the army. "Good Rostov, whose father sends for 10 thousand, to talk about how he does not want to bow to anyone, and no one will go to the waiters; but I, having nothing except his head, it is necessary to make a career and not lose cases, and use them. " In Olmutz he had not caught that day Prince Andrew. But the sight of Olmutz, where there was a headquarters, the diplomatic corps and the two emperors lived with their retinues - courtiers approached, but more intensified his desire to belong to this world supreme. He did not know anyone, and despite its nifty Guards uniform, all these higher men, scurrying through the streets in their elegant carriages, plumes, ribbons and decorations, courtiers and the military seemed to stand so far above him Guards little officer did not just do not want to, but could not recognize its existence. Indoors Kutuzov commander in chief, where he asked Bolkonsky, all these adjutants and even the orderlies looked at him as if he wanted to convince that like him, a lot of officers here hanging around and they are all already very tired. Despite this, or rather because of this, the next day, the 15th day, after dinner, he again went to Olmutz and, entering the house occupied by Kutuzov, asked Bolkonsky. Prince Andrew was at home, and Boris spent in the great hall, which probably danced before, but now there were five beds, diverse furniture: table, chairs, and a clavichord. One aide, close the door, the Persian robe, sat at his desk and wrote. Other, red, thick Nesvitski, lying on a bed with his hands behind his head, and laughed with him crouching officer. The third game on the clavichord Viennese Waltz, a fourth lying on these harpsichord and sang along with him. Bolkonsky was not. None of these gentlemen, noticing Boris, has not changed its position. Those who wrote, and which turned Boris angrily turned around and told him that Prince Andrew on duty, and that he was left in the door to the reception, if he needed to see him. Boris thanked him and went to the reception. The reception was a dozen officers and generals. At that time, as the ascended Boris, Prince Andrew, contemptuously narrowed (with the special kind of polite weariness which makes it clear that, if it were not my duty, I have a minute with you did not talk), I am listening to the old Russian general with decorations, which is almost on tiptoe, on the drawing, with a soldier's obsequious expression purple face something reported to Prince Andrew. - Very good, good enough to wait - he told General the French accent in Russian, he said, when he wanted to speak contemptuously, and noticing Boris, without resorting more to the general (who imploringly ran after him, asking for something else listen), Prince Andrew with a cheerful smile, nodding to him, he turned to Boris. Boris at this moment is already clearly realized that he foresaw before, exactly what in the army, except that of subordination and discipline, which was written in the statute, and who knew in the regiment, and he knew there was another, more substantial subordination, one that makes it tightened with a red-faced general wait respectfully, while captain Prince Andrew, for your pleasure to be more comfortable talking to a lieutenant Drubetskiy. More than ever, Boris decided to continue to serve on the wrong to write in the statute, and under this unwritten subordination. He now felt that only due to the fact that it has been recommended to Prince Andrew, he was already just above the general who in other cases, in the front, could destroy it, the Guard ensign. Prince Andrew came up to him and took his hand. - It is a pity that yesterday you did not find me. I fussed all day with the Germans. We traveled with Weyrother verify disposition. Germans take on accuracy - no end! Boris smiled, as if he knew something that, as is well known, hinting Prince Andrew. But the first time he heard the name Weyrother and even the word disposition. - Well, my dear, everything you want in the adjutant? I thought about you during this time. - Yes, I thought - involuntarily for some reason blushing, said Boris, - ask the commander in chief; to him was a letter for me from Prince Kuragin; I would like to ask only because - he added, as if apologizing, I'm afraid, guards will not be in business. - Good! OK! we all negotiations - said Prince Andrew, - just give report about this gentleman, and I belong to you. While Prince Andrew went to report about the Crimson General, General, this apparently did not share the ideas of the benefits of Boris unwritten subordination, so put his eyes in a daring Ensign, prevented him to finish with the adjutant that Boris felt uncomfortable. He turned away and was looking forward to when the return of Prince Andrew in chief's office. - Look here, my dear, I thought of you, - said Prince Andrew, when they went into the great hall with the clavichord. - By the Commander in Chief for you to go there is nothing, - said Prince Andrew - he will utter you a lot of compliments, say, to come to him to dinner ( "it would have been not so bad for a service for the chain of command," thought Boris), but from then on nothing happens; We, aides and orderlies, the battalion will be soon. But here's what we'll do: I have a good friend, an adjutant general and a fine man, Prince Dolgorukov; and although you may not know this, but the fact is that now Kutuzov with his staff and we are all exactly does not mean anything: everything is now concentrated in the sovereign; so here we Let's go to Dolgorukov, and I have to go to him, I really told him about you; so we'll see; if he finds it possible to attach you with me, or somewhere out there, closer to the sun .K. Prince Andrew always particularly animated when he had to lead the young person and help him in the secular success. Under the pretext of helping another, which he would never have pride took for himself, he was close to the environment that gave success and which attracted him to her. He very willingly took up Boris and went with him to Dolgorukov prince. It was late at night, when they went into Olmyutsky palace occupied by the emperors and their retinue. At this very day was the military council, which was attended by all members of Hofkriegsrat and both the Emperor. At the council, in opposition to the views of the elderly - Kutuzov and Prince Shvartsernberga, it was decided to advance immediately and give a decisive battle to Bonaparte. The Military Council has just ended, when Prince Andrew accompanied by Boris came to the palace to find Dolgorukov. Quelle terrible chose que la guerre! vanguard troops camped in front Wischau, since the enemy chain, assign us a place at the slightest skirmish during the day. Vanguard announced was grateful sovereign, promised rewards, and people dealt a double portion of vodka. Even more fun than the previous night, campfire crackled and the soldiers' songs were heard. Denisov on that night celebrated the production of its in the Majors, and Rostov already pretty drunk at the end of the feast, proposed a toast to the Emperor's health, but "not a sovereign emperor is said to formal dinners - he said - but for the Emperor's health, good , charming and a great man; drink to his health and for certain victory over the French! "- Coley before we fought, - he said - and did not allow the French descent as a Shengrabenom, now what will happen when he is ahead? We're all gonna die, die with pleasure for him. So, ladies and gentlemen? Maybe I did not say so, I drank a lot; yes I feel, and you will too. To the health of Alexander the First! Hurray! - Hurray! - sounded encouraged by the officers voice. And the old captain Kirsten shouted enthusiastically and no less sincerely than the twenty Rostov. When officers drunk and smashed their glasses, Kirsten poured other and, in his shirt and breeches, with a glass in his hand approached the soldier fires in majestic pose swinging up his hand, with his long white mustache and a white breast, came into view of the flung-open shirt He stopped in the firelight. - Guys, for the sovereign emperor's health, for the victory over their enemies, Hurray! - he shouted to his valiant, senile, hussar's baritone. Hussars crowded together and answered with a loud cry. Late at night, when everyone had gone, Denisov patted his short hand on the shoulder of his favorite Rostova. - This is on the march not to fall in love with someone, so he tsa'ya love, - he said. - Dennis, you do not mess it - shouted Rostov, - it is high, such a wonderful feeling that ... - Ve'yu, ve'yu, d'uzhok and 'Split panes and odob'yayu ... - No, do not! And Rostov got up and wandered between the fires, dreaming about what it would be happiness die, not to save the life of (this he did not dare to dream), but simply to die in the eyes of the Emperor. He was really in love, and in the king, and the glory of Russian arms and the hope of future triumph. And he is not alone in experiencing this sense of those memorable days preceding the battle of Austerlitz: nine-tenths of the people of the Russian army at the time were in love, though less ecstatically, to their king and to the glory of Russian arms. XI The next day, the Emperor stopped in Wischau. Life medic Villiers has been repeatedly calling for him. The headquarters and the nearest troops spread the news that the Emperor was unwell. He had not eaten and slept badly that night, as the approximate said. The cause of this illness is the strong impression made on the sensitive soul of the sovereign views wounded and killed. At the dawn of the 17th in Wischau it was transmitted to the outposts French officer who came under a flag of truce, demanding a meeting with the Russian emperor. This officer was Savary. The Emperor had just fallen asleep, and so Savary had to wait. At noon, he was admitted to the Emperor, and an hour later went with Prince Dolgorukov to the outposts of the French army. As could be heard, the purpose of sending Savary was to offer the Emperor Alexander a meeting with Napoleon. In a personal interview, to the delight and pride of the whole army, it was refused, and instead of the sovereign Prince Dolgorukov, the victor at Wischau was sent with Savary to negotiate with Napoleon, if these negotiations, against expectations, were aimed at a real desire for peace. Toward evening Dolgorukov came back, went straight to the Tsar, and I stayed with him for a long time alone. November 18 and 19 troops have been two go ahead, and the enemy's outposts after brief skirmishes retreated. In the higher spheres of the army with a half-day on the 19th started strong busily excited movement, which lasted until the next morning, the 20th of November, in which it was given as a memorable battle of Austerlitz. Before noon on the 19th move, lively conversations, running, sending aides were limited to one main apartment emperors; the afternoon of the same day the motion is transferred to the headquarters of Kutuzov and staffs columned superiors. Night resounded through aides that movement to the ends and parts of the army, and in the night from 19 to 20 rose overnight, buzzed speak and swayed and moved on a huge canvas devyativerstnym 80 titysyachnaya mass of the allied forces. Centered movement that started in the morning at the headquarters of the emperors, and has given an impetus to all further movement, it was like the first movement in the mid-wheel drive large tower clock. Slowly moved one wheel, turned another, the third, and faster and faster go to spin the wheel, blocks, gears, chimes began to play, popping figure, and began rhythmically move the arrows, showing the result of the movement. As in the mechanism of a clock, and the mechanism of military affairs, as well uncontrollably until the last result again this movement, and as indifferent motionless, a moment before the transfer movement of the mechanism, to which have not yet reached the stage. Whistle on the axes of the wheel, clinging to the teeth, hissing on the speed of spinning units and an adjacent wheel as calm and still, as if it is ready to stand for hundreds of years etoyu immobility; but the moment came - hooked on the lever, and, yielding to the movement, cracking, turning the wheel and merges into one action, the result and purpose of which he does not understand. How to watch the result of the complex motion of countless different wheels and blocks have only a slow and uravnomerennoe motion arrow indicating the time and the result of complex human movements the 1000 Russian and French - all the passions, desires, remorse, humiliations, sufferings, outbursts of pride, fear , these people delight - was the only losing the battle of Austerlitz, the so-called battle of the three emperors, ie slow movement of world-historical arrows on the face of the history of mankind... Prince Andrew was on duty that day and all the time the commander in chief. At 6 o'clock in the evening, Kutuzov went to the headquarters of the emperors and, without samples from the emperor, I went to the chief Marshal Count Tolstoy. Prince Andrew took advantage of this time to come to Dolgorukov to know the details of the case. Prince Andrew felt that Kutuzov was upset about something and dissatisfied, and that they are unhappy at headquarters, and that all persons Imperial's headquarters have with him the tone of people who know something that others do not know; and so he wanted to talk to Dolgorukov. - Well, hello, mon cher, - said Dolgorukov, who was sitting at tea with Bilibin. - Holiday tomorrow. What's your old man? not in the spirit? - Not to say that was not in the spirit, but it seems to be, I would like to be heard. - Yes, he listened to the council of war, and will listen when he talks the matter; but to delay and wait for something now when Bonaparte fears most general battle - it is impossible. - Yes, you saw him? - said Prince Andrew. - Well, that Bonaparte? What impression did he make on you? - Yes, I saw and was convinced that he fears a general engagement more than anything else - repeated Dolgorukov, evidently valuing this general conclusion drawn by him from his interview with Napoleon. - If he had been afraid of the battle, which would have been to require him to this meeting, to negotiate and, most importantly, to retreat, while the retreat so disgusted his entire method of warfare? Believe me, he is afraid, afraid of a general battle, his time has come. I'm telling you. - But tell him that? - I have asked Prince Andrew. - He is a man in a gray overcoat, very willing, so I told him, "Your Majesty," but, unfortunately its not received by me no title. Here is a man, and nothing more, - replied Dolgorukov, looking round at Bilibin with a smile. - Despite my full respect for old Kutuzov, - he went on - well we would all be waiting for something, and so giving him a chance to leave or cheat us, whereas now it is right in our hands. No, one must not forget Suvorov and his rule: do not put yourself in a position to attack, and the attack itself. Believe me, in war the energy of young men often shows the way rather than all the experience of the old cunctator. - But what is the position we attack it? I was at the outposts today, and can not decide where exactly he stands with the main forces, - said Prince Andrew. He wanted to express his Dolgoruky, compiled them, a plan of attack. - Oh, it's totally do not care - Dolgorukov said quickly, getting up and opening the map on the table. - All events are foreseen: if he stood Brunn ... And Prince Dolgorukov rapidly and it is not clear plan told flank movement Weyrother. Prince Andrew began to argue and prove the plan, which could be equally good with the plan Weyrother, but have the disadvantage that Weyrother plan has already been approved. As soon as Prince Andrew began to demonstrate the disadvantages and benefits of his, Prince Dolgorukov ceased to listen to him and absently staring not at stake, but in the face of Prince Andrew. - However, Kutuzov is now a council of war: there you can still make it, - said Dolgorukov. - That's what I'll do, - said Prince Andrew, moving away from the card. - And what do you care, gentlemen? - Bilibin said, still with a cheerful smile, listening to their conversation, and now, apparently, intending to make a joke. - Will there be a tomorrow, win or lose, the glory of Russian weapons insured. Except your Kutuzov, there is no Russian head of the colony. Chiefs: Herr general Wimpfen, le comte de Langeron, le prince de Lichtenstein, le prince de Hohenloe et enfin Prsch ... prsch ... et ainsi de suite, comme tous les noms polonais. [Wimpfen, Count Langeron, Prince of Liechtenstein, Hohenlohe and even Prishprshiprsh as all Polish names. ] - Taisez vous, mauvaise langue, [Hold your zloyazychie. ] - Dolgorukov said. - It is not true, now two Russian: Miloradovich and Dokhturov, and would have been third, Count Arakcheev, but his nerves are weak. - However, Mikhail Ilarionovich, I think, came, - said Prince Andrew. - I wish you happiness and success, gentlemen, - he added, and walked out, shaking hands with Dolgorukov and Bibilinu. Returning home, Prince Andrew could not help but ask who was sitting silently beside him Kutuzov, that he thinks about tomorrow's battle? Kutuzov looked sternly at his adjutant and, after a pause, replied: - I think the battle will be lost, and I said so to Count Tolstoy and asked him to tell the emperor. What do you think he said to me? Eh, mon cher general, je me mele de riz et des et cotelettes, melez vous des affaires de la guerre. [And, my dear General! I am engaged with rice and cutlets, and you're dealing with military affairs. ] Yeah ... That's what I answered! XII At 10 o'clock in the evening Weyrother with his plans to Kutuzov's quarters where he was appointed to a council of war. All the commanders of columns were summoned to the commander in chief, and with the exception of Prince Bagration, who declined to come, were all there at the appointed hour. Weyrother former full control of the proposed battle, by his eagerness and briskness presented a marked contrast to the dissatisfied and drowsy Kutuzov, who reluctantly played the role of the chairman and the head of the military council. Weyrother obviously I felt in glave.dvizheniya, which has become irresistible. He was like a horse harnessed to a run with a load of downhill. Whether he was carrying, or drove, he did not know; but he rushed at all possible speed with no time to consider of what will lead this movement. Weyrother was doubled for personal examination this evening in the enemy chain and twice in princes, Russian and Austrian, to report and explain, in his office, where he dictated the German dispositions. He was exhausted, and now came to Kutuzov. He apparently was so busy that he even forgot to be respectful with the commander in chief: He interrupted him, talked rapidly and indistinctly, without looking at the face of his interlocutor, without answering to do questions to him, has been soiled with mud and had the appearance of a miserable, exhausted, confused and At the same time self-confident and proud. Kutuzov held a small noble castle near Ostralits. The large living room that was made commander in chief's office were gathered Kutuzov himself, Weyrother and members of the military council. They drank tea. We expected only Prince Bagration to begin the council of war. In the 8th hour I came orderly Bagrationa with news that can not be Prince. Prince Andrew came in to inform the commander in chief and, using previously given him by Kutuzov to be present at the council, he remained in the room. - Since Prince Bagration is not, then we can begin - said Weyrother hastily rising from his seat and approached the table on which was spread a huge map Brunn surroundings. Kutuzov in his uniform unbuttoned, from which, as it were, released, came out on the collar of his fat neck, sat in a chair Voltaire, putting symmetrically chubby old hands on the armrests and almost asleep. At the sound of the voice Weyrother he forcibly opened one eye. - Yes, yes, please, and then later, - he said and, nodding his head, dropped it, and closed his eyes again. If at first the board members thought that Kutuzov was pretending to be asleep, the sound of which he published his nose during a later reading, argued that at this moment for the commander in chief it was a question more important than the desire to show his contempt for the disposition or what would Anyway: it was a matter for him of an irresistible human needs - .sna. He really was asleep. Weyrother with the movement of a man too busy to lose even one minute of time, glanced at Kutuzov and making sure that he was sleeping, he took the paper and a loud monotonous voice began to read the disposition of future battles under the title, which he also read: "The disposition to attack the enemy position behind Kobelnitz and Sokolnitz, November 20, 1805. " Disposition was very complicated and difficult. In the original disposition was listed: Da der Feind mit seinerien linken Fluegel an die mit Wald bedeckten Berge lehnt und sich mit seinerien rechten Fluegel laengs Kobeinitz und Sokolienitz hinter die dort befindIichen Teiche zieht, wir im Gegentheil mit unserem linken Fluegel seinen rechten sehr debordiren, so ist es vortheilhaft letzteren Fluegel des Feindes zu attakiren, besondere wenn wir die Doerfer Sokolienitz und Kobelienitz im Besitze haben, wodurch wir dem Feind zugleich in die Flanke fallen und ihn auf der Flaeche zwischen Schlapanitz und dem Thuerassa-Walde verfolgen koennen, indem wir dem Defileen von Schlapanitz und Bellowitz ausweichen, welche die feindliche Front decken. Zu dieserien Endzwecke ist es noethig ... Die erste Kolonne Marieschirt ... die zweite Kolonne Marieschirt ... die dritte Kolonne Marieschirt ... [Since the enemy relies left wing of his on the forested mountains, and the right wing runs along Kobelnitz and Sokolnitz behind the ponds are there, and we on the contrary, superior to our left wing of his right, it benefits us to attack the enemy's wing this last will, Especially if we will take the village Sokolnice and Kobelnitz being placed in the possibility of attacking the enemy's flank and pursue him in the plain between Slapanice and forest Tyurasskim avoiding however defile between Slapanice and Belovitsa wherewith covered enemy front. For this purpose it is necessary ... ... The first column marches second column marching ... third column marching ...] and t. D., Read Weyrother. The generals seemed to listen reluctantly to the difficult dispositions. Blond high general Buxhowden was leaning back against the wall, and stopping their eyes on a burning candle, he seemed not to listen, and even did not want to think that he listens. Directly opposite Weyrother, staring at him with shining eyes open in a military pose, propped hands with stretched out his elbows on his knees, sat the ruddy Miloradovich with raised shoulders and a mustache. He remained stubbornly silent, staring into the face Weyrother, and kept his eye on him just in time, when the Austrian chief of staff fell silent. At this time Miloradovich much looked at other generals. But from that significant look I could not understand whether he agreed or disagreed, happy or unhappy disposition. Closest to Weyrother sat Count Langeron with a thin smile southern French face, not to leave it in all the time reading, looking at her slender fingers, quickly turned over the corners a gold snuffbox with the portrait. In the middle of one of the longest periods he stopped the rotary motion of the snuffbox, he raised his head with an unpleasant courtesy at the very ends of the thin lips interrupted Weyrother and wanted to say something; But the Austrian general, continuing to read, frowned angrily and waved his elbows as if to say, then, then you tell me your thoughts, and now if you please look at the map and listen. Langeron lifted his eyes with a look of bewilderment, looked at Miloradovich, as if seeking an explanation, but met considerable nothing znachuschy look Miloradovich sadly looked down again and began to twirl his snuffbox. - Une lecon de geographie, [lesson of geography] - he said to himself, but loud enough to be heard. Przebyszewski with respectful but dignified politeness bent by hand to the ear Weyrother, with a man absorbed in attention. Little growth Dokhturov sat opposite Weyrother with diligent and modest mien, and stooping over the decomposition map conscientiously studied the dispositions and terrain unknown to him. - And, well, look, - he said, after a pause. - Yes, sir. Rostov spurred the horse, called NCO Fedchenko and two other hussars, told them to go after him and trotted downhill toward the cries lasted. Rostov and creepy and it was fun to go alone with three hussars there, in the mysterious and dangerous misty distance where no one was before him. Bagration shouted to him from the mountain, so he did not go beyond the stream, but Rostov pretended as if he did not hear his words, and, without stopping, went on and on, constantly deceiving, taking bushes for trees and gullies for men and continually explaining their deceptions. Going down the hill at a trot, he had not seen any of our or the enemy's fires, but louder, more clearly hear the French shouting. In the hollow, he saw in front of something like the river, but when he reached it, he found proezzhennuyu road. Leaving the road, he reined in his horse undecided: go through it, or cross it and go on the black field up the hill. Svetlevshey go on in the fog was safer road because most people could consider. "Get behind me," he said, crossed the road and began to climb the mountain at a gallop to the place where the evening was the French picket. - Your Honor, that's it! - said one of the hussars behind. And had not yet Rostov see something suddenly zachernevsheesya in the mist as light flashed and snapped a shot, and a bullet as if complaining about something hummed high in the fog and flew out of the hearing. Other gun is not fired, but the light shone on the shelf. Rostov turned his horse and rode back at a gallop. Still heard in different intervals of four shots, and bullets began to sing different tones somewhere in the fog. Rostov reined in his horse, more cheerful just like it, from the shots, and went a step. "Come again, Come again!" Said some cheerful voice in his soul. But the shot was no more. Just driving up to Bagration, Rostov again put his horse into a gallop, and holding his hand to his visor, rode up to him. Dolgorukov still insisted on his view that the French retreated, and only in order to deceive us, kindled lights. - What does that prove? - he said at the time, as Rostov rode up to him. - They could retreat and leave the pickets. - We see not yet all gone, the prince, - said Bagration. - Until tomorrow morning, tomorrow will learn everything. - On Mount picket, Your Excellency, all in the same place where he was the night before - reported Rostov, leaning forward, holding his hand to his visor, unable to suppress a smile fun induced in him by his trip and, most importantly, the sound of bullets. - Well, well, - said Bagration - thank you, Mr. Officer. - Your Excellency, - said Rostov, - let me ask you. - What? - Tomorrow our squadron is assigned to the reserves; let me ask you secondment to the 1st Squadron. - What's the name? - Count Rostov. - Oh good. Stay with me orderly. - Ilya Andreyevich son? - Dolgorukov said. But the growth did not answer him. - So I hope your Excellency. - I'll have. "Tomorrow, it may be, will be sent with any orders to the Tsar - he thought. - Thank God". Shouts and lights in the enemy army comes from the fact that while the troops read the order of Napoleon, the Emperor himself rode astride their bivouacs. The soldiers, seeing the emperor lighted straw bunches and shouting: vive l'empereur! We ran after him. Napoleon's order was as follows: "Soldiers! Russian army out against you to avenge the Austrian, Ulm army. These are the same battalions you broke at Gollabrunne and you have since pursued consistently to this point. A position that we occupy, - powerful, and yet they will go to get around me right, they will expose the flank of me! Soldiers! I myself will lead your battalions. I'll stay away from the fire, if you, with your usual bravery, will make the ranks of the enemy's disorder and confusion; but if the victory will be at least one minute is questionable, you will see your Emperor exposed first blow of the enemy, because it can not be fluctuations in the victory, especially on the day in question the honor of the French infantry, which is so necessary for the honor of their nation. under etc.edlogom slip not injured troubleth series! But let every man be fully imbued with the idea that it is necessary to defeat these mercenaries of England, inspired with such a hatred against our nation. This victory will finish our tour, and we can go back to their winter quarters, where we will catch the new French troops, which are formed in France; and then the world, which I will make will be worthy of my people, you and me. Napoleon. " XIV At 5 o'clock in the morning it was still quite dark. center forces and reserves the right flank Bagrationa stood still motionless; but on the left flank the columns of infantry, cavalry and artillery, bound at first to descend from the heights to attack the French right flank and throw it at the disposition, in Bohemian mountains, we have already begun to move and began to climb out of their nights. Smoke from the fires, in which throwing everything superfluous, eat your eyes. It was cold and dark. The officers hastily drinking tea and lunch, the soldiers chewed biscuits, fought off their feet roll, warmed and flowed against the lights, throwing the remains into the wood booths, chairs, tables, wheels, tubs, all unnecessary, that it was impossible to take away with them. Austrian kolonnovozhatyh scurried between the Russian troops and served as harbingers of speech. As the only show an Austrian officer about parking regimental commander, the regiment began to move: the soldiers came running from the fires, hid in tube tops, bags in the cart, assorted guns and built. Buttoned officers, wore swords and knapsacks and shouting, bypassed the ranks; notation and orderlies harnessed, stacked and linked the carts. Adjutants, battalion and regimental commanders sat on horseback, cross, gave his last orders, instructions and orders remaining notation, and sounded the monotonous tramp of thousands of feet. The columns were moving, not knowing where, and saw from the people around them, smoke and haze from growing any of the areas from which they came, nor the one in which they entered. Soldiers on the move as well surrounded, limited and Draw his regiment as a seaman ship on which it is located. No matter how far it may be passed, in whatever strange, unknown and dangerous latitude neither he came around it - both for the sailor is always and everywhere the same decks, masts, ropes of the ship - always and everywhere the same comrades, the same ranks, the same sergeant major Ivan Mitrich, the same company commander dog Fido, the same bosses. Soldiers rarely wants to know those latitudes, where the ship is his; but in the day of battle, God knows how, and where, in the moral world, the troops heard, one for each basic note, which sounds the approach of something decisive and solemn, and causes them to non-core curiosity. Soldiers during battles excitedly try to get out of the interests of his regiment, listen, get accustomed and eagerly questioned about what is going on around them. The fog became so strong that, despite the fact that the dawn, could not see ten feet in front of him. Bushes seemed huge trees, level ground - cliffs and slopes. Everywhere, on all sides, it could be faced with an invisible enemy in ten steps. But long columns were all in the same fog, descending and climbing the mountains, bypassing the gardens and hedges, on a new, strange place, anywhere without encountering the enemy. On the contrary, the front, the rear, on all sides, the soldiers learned that they were going in the same direction, our Russian column. Each soldier a pleasure getting to the heart because he knew that there, where he is going, that is, no one knows where, there is still a lot, a lot of us. - Oh, you went and Kursk, - said in the ranks. - Passion, my boy, that our troops have gathered! Vechor looked like fires spread, the edge of the end in sight. Moscow - one word! Although none of the columned superiors not approached the ranks and did not speak with the soldiers (Columnar bosses, as we saw at the council, they were not in the spirit and unhappy undertaken by the business and therefore only executed orders and did not care about how to amuse the soldiers), despite the fact the soldiers were fun, as always, going to a business, especially in the offensive. But about an hour after going all in dense fog, a large part of the army had to stop, and swept through the ranks unpleasant consciousness commit disorder and confusion. How is it transmitted consciousness - very difficult to determine; but it is certain that it is transferred to an unusually-right and quickly spreads, imperceptibly and inevitably, as the water in the valley. If the Russian army would have been one thing, without allies, then, perhaps, it would have been a long time, until this consciousness disorder would make obscheyu confidence; but now, with special pleasure and naturalness of attributing the cause of the unrest to the stupid Germans, all were convinced that there is a harmful confusion, which is done sausage makers. - What became something? Al blocked? Or so at the Frenchman stumbled? - No I have not. And that would be firing began. - So in a hurry to speak, and were - began to no avail in the middle of the field - all Germans damned confused. Eka stupid devils! - That's what I would have let them in advance. And that, I suppose, behind the huddle. That's no longer stand emshi. - Yes, that soon there be? Cavalry, say, the way barred, - said the officer. - Oh, damn Germans, their land do not know, - said another. - You are a division? - I shouted, approaching, the adjutant. - eighteenth. - So why are you here? you would long ago have come to be, is now up to the evening will not pass. - And this is the something stupid; do not know what they do, - said the officer and drove away. Then he passed the general and not angrily in Russian shouted something. - Tafa-Lafayette, and what murmurs, could not make out anything, - said the soldier, mimicking the general drove away. - I would have shot them, scoundrels! - At nine o'clock ordered in place to be, and we are not even half over. That's the order! - repeated from different angles. And the feeling of power, which were the cause of the troops, the start address in frustration and anger at the stupid orders and the Germans. The reason for the confusion was the fact that during the movement of the Austrian cavalry, marching on the left flank, the higher authorities found that our center is too distant from the right flank, and the whole cavalry was ordered to go to the right side. Several thousand cavalry progressed to the infantry, and the infantry had to wait. Ahead there was a clash between the Austrian and Russian kolonnovozhatyh general. Russian general shouted, demanding that stopped was the cavalry; Austrian argued that not he was guilty, but the higher authorities. The troops meanwhile stood bored and undismayed. After an hour's delay troops moved, finally, on and they started down the hill. Fog, expenses on the mountain, only thicker stretched in the lower ranks, where troops descended. Ahead, in the fog, there was one other shot first tumble in different intervals: bill ... tat, and then all the folding and more, and tie the matter over the river Goldbach. Not expecting to find at the bottom of the creek enemy and accidentally in the fog stumbled on him, not hearing the words of animation from higher superiors, with the consciousness spread through the troops, it was late, and most importantly, in a thick fog without seeing anything in front and around him, Russian lazily and slowly exchanging fire with the enemy, move forward and stopped again without getting in-time orders from the leaders and aides, who played the harlot of fog in an unfamiliar area without finding its parts troops. Thus began the case for the first, second and third pillars, which went down. The fourth column, in which he was Kutuzov stood on Pratsenskih altitudes. At the base, where the case began, it was still thick fog at the top proyasnelo, but still could not see anything of what was going to come. Were all the forces of the enemy, as we expected, ten miles from us and it was here, in this line of fog - no one knew until the ninth hour. It was 9:00 in the morning. Fog continuous sea stretched along the bottom, but the village Slapanice, on top, on which stood Napoleon, surrounded by his marshals, it was quite light. it was clear over it, blue sky, and a huge orb of the sun, like a huge hollow purple float on the surface of the milk waved sea mist. Not only all the French troops, but Napoleon himself with the staff was not on the other side streams and bottom villages Sokolnice and Šlapanice, for which we had intended to take a position and to start a business, but on this side, so close to our forces that Napoleon with the naked eye could in our army to distinguish horse from walking. Napoleon stood slightly in front of his marshals on the little gray Arabian horse in a blue overcoat, in the same one in which he made the Italian campaign. He just stared at the hills that seem to jut out from the sea of ​​fog, and for which the distance moved Russian troops, and listened to the sounds of shooting in the ravine. At the time, his thin face did not move a muscle; shining eyes were still fixed on one spot. His assumption proved to be correct. Russian troops have already descended into a part of the hollow to the ponds and lakes, part of the purified ones Pratsenskie height that he intended to attack and held key positions. He saw among the fog, in the recess, compiled by two mountains near the village of Pratzen, all in one direction to move to the rivers, glittering bayonets, Russian columns and one after the other hiding in the sea of ​​fog. According to the information received by him in the evening, the sounds of wheels and moves to hear the night at the outposts, for disorderly movements Russian columns, all the assumptions he saw clearly that the allies believed him far ahead of ourselves, that column were moving near Pratzen constituted the center of Russian the army, and that the center already weakened in order to successfully attack it. But he still did not start the case. Today was his day of celebration - the anniversary of his coronation. Before the morning, he dozed off for a few hours and a healthy, cheerful, fresh, in that happy mood in which everything seems possible and everything is possible, mounted his horse and rode out into the field. He stood motionless, looking at rising above the fog height, and his face was cold that particular shade of self-confident, well-deserved happiness, which is on the face of love and happy boy. Marshals stood behind him and did not dare to entertain his attention. He looked from Pratsenskie height, then the sun comes up from the mist. When the sun is completely out of the fog and blinding glitter splashed across the fields and mist (as if he had just been waiting for this to start the business), he took off his glove with a beautiful, white hand, made her mark marshals and gave the order to start a business. Marshals, accompanied by adjutants, galloped off in different directions, and in a few minutes, quickly moved the main forces of the French army to the Pratsenskim heights that more and more Russian troops were cleared, we get down to the left into the ravine. XV At 8 o'clock Kutuzov rode to Pratzen riding ahead of the 4th Miloradovichevskoy columns, the one that was supposed to take the place of columns Przebyszewski and Langeron, after already down. He shook hands with the people of the front of the regiment, and gave the order to move, showing that he was going to fight this column. Leaving to the Prace village, he stopped. Prince Andrew, including a huge number of people made up the entourage chief, stood behind him. Prince Andrew felt excited, angry and at the same time restrained and calm, how is a person for a long time upon the occurrence of the desired moment. He was firmly convinced that today was the day of his Toulon or the Pont d'Arcole. As it happens, he did not know, but he was adamant that it would be. The terrain and the position of our troops were known to him, as far as they can be known to one of our army. His own strategic plan, which, obviously, is now and think nothing to enforce, it was forgotten. Now, already entering Weyrother plan, Prince Andrew pondered which can happen by accident and made new considerations, such that it might take its speed considerations and determination. Left at the bottom, in the fog, he could hear gunfire between the invisible forces. There seemed to Prince Andrew, focus battle there meets an obstacle, and "there and then I sent - he thought - with a brigade or division, and there is something with the flag in his hand, I'll go ahead and I will break everything that is before me". Prince Andrew could not stand to look at the banners held battalions. Looking at the banner, he kept thinking: maybe it's the same banner, with whom I have to go in front of the troops. Night fog in the morning left at altitudes of only the frost, the transition to the dew, the hollows in the fog stretched even milky sea. Nothing was visible in the hollow of the left, where our troops went down and where came the gunfire. Above the heights was a dark, clear sky, and to the right a huge orb of the sun. Ahead, far away, on the shores of the misty sea, could be seen protruding forested hills, which was supposed to be the enemy's army, and could be seen something. Right enter the field of mist guard, sounded a whisper, and the wheels and the occasional gleaming bayonets; to the left, outside the village, similar masses of cavalry came up and hiding in the sea of ​​fog. In front and behind moved infantry. Commander in chief was standing at the exit of the village, passing by the troops themselves. Kutuzov this morning seemed exhausted and irritable. Marching past his infantry stopped without orders, obviously, because in front of anything to keep her. - But tell me, finally, to build in battalion columns and go round about the village, - he said angrily pulled up to General Kutuzov. - How do you not understand, Your Excellency, my dear sir, that stretch out on the streets of the village can not defile, when we go against the enemy. - I was supposed to build outside the village, your excellency, - answered the general. Kutuzov laughed bitterly. - Well you're deploying in front of the enemy's mind is very good. - The enemy is still far away, your excellency. According to the disposition of ... - The disposition! - bitterly cried Kutuzov, - and it is you who said ... Kindly do as you are ordered?. - Yes, sir. - Mon cher, - said in a whisper Prince Andrew Nesvitski, - le vieux est d'une humeur de chien. [My dear, the old man is not much in the spirit. ] Kutuzov rode Austrian officer with a green plume on the hat, in white uniform, and asked the name of the emperor: whether the cause of the fourth column is made? Kutuzov, without answering him, turned away, and his glance accidentally fell on Prince Andrew, who was standing beside him. Seeing Bolkonsky, Kutuzov softened angry and caustic expression glance, as if realizing that his aide was not to blame for what was happening. And, not answering the Austrian adjutant, he turned to Bolkonsky: - Allez voir, mon cher, si la troisieme division a depasse le village. Dites-lui de s'arreter et d'attendre mes ordres. [Go, my dear, to see if the third division through the village took place. Tell them to her to stop and wait for my order. ] Only that Prince Andrew pulled away, he stopped him. - Et demandez-lui, si les tirailleurs sont postes, - he added. - Ce qu'ils font, ce qu'ils font! [And asked if the arrows are placed. - What are they doing what they are doing! ] - he said to himself, still not answering the Austrian. Prince Andrew galloped errand. Overtaking all marching in front of the battalions, he stopped the third division and found that, indeed, in front of our columns were not shooting chain. The colonel of the regiment of the former front was very surprised transferred to it from the Chief of the orders to sprinkle shooters. The regimental commander was standing there in full confidence that in front of him there are troops, and that the enemy can not be closer than 10 miles away. Indeed, the front could not see anything except the desert, leaning forward and ready made thick fog. Ordering on behalf of the commander in chief to fulfill up, Prince Andrew galloped back. Kutuzov was standing still at the same place, and an old man down on the saddle their fat body, heavy yawned and closed his eyes. The troops did not move, but stood a gun to his leg. - Well, well, - he said to Prince Andrew and asked the general who, watch in hand saying it was time to move, since all the columns from the left flank had already descended. - Still have time, Your Excellency, - he said through a yawn Kutuzov. - We'll make it! - he repeated. At this time behind Kutuzov heard in the distance sounds greet regiments, and these voices have become fast approaching around the stretch of line stretching the advancing Russian columns. It was evident that the one with whom greeted, went quickly. When the soldiers of the regiment shouted, standing in front of which Kutuzov, he departed somewhat to the side and looked around, frowning. On the road from Pratzen galloped like a squadron of colorful horsemen. Two of them are large galloping close ahead of the rest. One was in a black uniform with white plumes on red englizirovannoy horse, the other in a white uniform on a black horse. These were two of the emperor and his retinue. Kutuzov, with affectation campaigners, located in the front, commanded "attention" standing armies and salute rode up to the emperor. His entire figure and manner suddenly changed. He took the view podnachalstvennogo, unthinking man. separated from one flank of the other, if you do not kill the one who will be sent (it was very likely), and if he even find in-chief, it was very difficult, sent did not have time to return before evening. Bagration looked round his suite with his big, nothing nevyrazhayuschimi, sleepy eyes and involuntarily transfixed with excitement and hope Rostov baby face first cast him in the eye. He sent it. - And if I meet His Majesty before the commander in chief, your excellency? - said Rostov, holding his hand to his visor. - You can tell his Majesty, - hurriedly interrupting Bagration, Dolgorukov said. A shift of the chain, Rostov had a nap a few hours before the morning and felt cheerful, bold, resolute, with that resilient movements, confidence in his luck and in the mood in which everything seems to be easy, fun and affordable. All his desires were executed this morning; given the decisive battle, he took part in it; moreover, he was an orderly when bravest generals Moreover, he went on a mission to Kutuzov, and perhaps even to himself emperor. The morning was clear, the horse was good for him. At his heart was joyful and happy. After receiving an order, he put his horse and galloped along the line. First he went through Bagration's troops, still do not come into the case and stood motionless; Then he moved into the space occupied by Uvarov's cavalry and here already noticed signs of movement and the preparations for the case; having passed Uvarov's cavalry, he had clearly heard the sound of cannon and gun fire in front of him. Shooting still prevailed. In the fresh, morning air were heard already, not as before in irregular intervals, by two, by three shots and then one or two cannon shots, and on slopes of mountains, in front of Pratzen, heard rifts volley of rifles, interrupts such frequent shots of the guns that sometimes a few cannon shots are not separated from each other and merged into a single drone. It could be seen on the slopes of the haze as if the guns were running to catch up with each other, and as the smoke swirled guns, blurred and merged one with the other. They were visible, in brilliance between bayonets smoke were moving mass infantry artillery and narrow green band with drawers. Rostov on the hill stopped for a moment the horse to see what was done; but no matter how he strained his attention, he could not understand or make out of what was done: moved there in the smoke of some people moving in front and behind some canvases troops; but why? Who? where? it was impossible to understand. View this and these sounds not only awakened in him some dull or timid feelings, but, on the contrary, gave him energy and determination. "Well, more, more is granted by!" - he turned mentally to these sounds, and again indulged skip the line further and further penetrating the area troops have entered the business. "Oh, how it will be there, I do not know, and everything will be fine!" Thought Rostov. After passing some Austrian troops, Rostov noticed that for the next part of the line (it was the Guard) have entered into a business. "All the better! Look close, "he thought. He went almost over the front line. Several horsemen galloping toward him. It was our Life Lancers, who upset rows back from the attack. Rostov passed them, involuntarily noticed one of them in the blood and rode on. "I do not! To this case," he thought. Before he could drive a few hundred steps after that, both to the left of it, to intercept him, appeared all over the field a huge mass of cavalry on black horses, white shiny uniforms, which were trotting toward him. Rostov put his horse at full gallop, in order to go out of the way of these horsemen, and he would be left of them, if they were all the same gait, but they all added speed, so that some of the horses have jumped. Rostov everything louder and louder grew their clatter and clanking of their weapons and their horses became more visible, shapes and even faces. They were our Horse Guards, marching to attack the French cavalry, move towards them. Horse Guards were galloping, but still holding the horses. Rostov had seen their faces and heard the command: "March, march!" Uttered by an officer to issue full swing his thoroughbred horse. Rostov, fearing to be crushed or lured into the attack on the French, galloped along the front, there was urine in his horse, and still did not manage to pass by them. Deadline Guardsman, a huge increase in the pockmarked man frowned angrily on seeing Rostov before him, with which he inevitably had to face. This Guardsman would certainly have knocked Rostov with his Bedouin (Rostov himself seemed so small and weak compared to these huge men and horses), if he had not thought to wave his whip in his eyes kavalergardovoy horse. Crows, heavy pyativershkovaya horse shied, putting the ears; but the pockmarked Guardsman drove her hips swung huge spurs and the horse, waving his tail and stretched his neck raced even faster. Hardly the Horse Guards passed Rostov, he heard their cry: "Hurray!" And looking back saw that the front rows of their mixing with other people, probably French, cavalry in red epaulettes. It was impossible to see anything, because immediately after that somewhere began to shoot guns, and all clothed with smoke. At the instant when the Horse Guards, having passed him, disappeared in the smoke, Rostov hesitated whether to them or go to gallop, which he needed. This was the brilliant charge of the Horse Guards, which amazed the French themselves. Rostov was terrible to hear then that from all this vast mass of handsome men, of all those brilliant, to thousandths of horses, rich, young men, officers and cadets, galloped past him, only eighteen men remained after the attack. "What I envy my not leave, and I'll maybe see the Emperor!" Thought Rostov and galloped on. Drew level with the Guards Corps, he said, that through it and around it flew yadry, not so much because he heard the sound of the nuclei, but because on the faces of the soldiers he saw the concern on the faces of the officers - unnatural warlike solemnity. Passing behind one of the lines of infantry guards regiments, he heard a voice call him by his name. - Rostov! - What? - he answered, not recognizing Boris. - What? in the first line fell! Our regiment went on the attack! - said Boris, smiling that happy smile, which is the case with young people, for the first time visited on fire. Rostov stopped. - Here's how! - he said. - Well? - repulsed! - excitedly said Boris, who became talkative. - You can imagine? And Boris began to tell how the guards, standing on the spot and saw in front of the troops, took them by the Austrians and suddenly the nuclei shot from these forces, learned that she was in the first line, and suddenly was due to join the case. Rostov without hearing Boris touched his horse. - Where are you going? - Boris asked. - His Majesty requested. - Here he is! - said Boris, who heard that Rostov had his Highness, instead of His Majesty. He pointed to the Grand Duke, who is a hundred feet away, in the helmet and in the Cavalry tunic, with his raised shoulders and frowning brows, shouting something Austrian white and pale officer. - But this is a great prince, and I to the commander in chief or sovereign, - said Rostov, and touched the horse was. - Earl, Earl! - shouted Berg, the same lively, like Boris, running on the other hand, - Earl, I'm injured right hand (he said, pointing wrist, bloody, tied a handkerchief) and stayed in the front. Earl, keep the sword in his left hand: in our breed von Berg, count, have all been knighted. Berg has something to say, but Rostov, without waiting for him, had already gone further. Having passed the Guards and a blank space, height, in order not to fall again in the first line as he came under the attack of the Horse Guards, rode along the line of reserves, far from going round the place where the hottest shooting was heard and gunfire. Suddenly in front of him and behind our troops, in a place where he could not assume the enemy, he heard rifle fire close. "What could it be? - thought Rostov. - The enemy in the rear of our troops? It can not be - thought Rostov, and the horror of fear for himself and for the outcome of the battle suddenly found it. - Whatever it was, however, - he thought - had nothing to go around today. I have to look in-chief here, and if all died, then my business to perish all together. " Bad feeling that had come suddenly to Rostov confirms more and more the farther he rode into the busy crowds of diverse forces the space located behind the village of Pratzen. - What? What? For whom are shooting? Who shoots? - asked Rostov, even with Russian and Austrian soldiers who had fled in droves across the path of its intermixed road. - The devil knows? All broke! Intermittent all! - answered him in Russian, German and Czech crowd running and not to understand in the same way as he did, what was going on here. - Beat the Germans! - shouted one. - The devil they tear up - traitors. - Zum Henker diese Ruesen ... [to the devil of the Russian ...] - something the Germans grumbled. Several of the wounded were on the road. Curses, shouts, groans merged into a single drone. The shooting died down and, as it was then learned Rostov, shot each other Russian and Austrian soldiers. "Oh my God! What is all this? - thought Rostov. - And here, where at any moment the Emperor may see them ... But no, it is true, only a few scoundrels. It will pass, it's not, it can not be - he thought. - Just as soon as possible, as quickly as possible to pass them, "The thought of defeat and flight could not to come to the head of Rostov. Though he saw French cannon and troops is on Pratsenskoy mountain on the same one where he was told to look for in-Chief, he could not and would not believe it. XVIII Around the village Praca Rostov ordered to look for Kutuzov and the Emperor. But here not only was not them, but there was no chief, but were heterogeneous crowd of frustrated troops. He drove already tired horse to soon pass the crowd, but the more he was moving, the crowd became upset. Along the main road, on which he rode, crowded carriages, carriages of all sorts, Russian and Austrian soldiers of all arms, the wounded and neranenye. Everything is buzzing and mixed pottered about a dark sound flew nuclei with French battery set at Pratsenskih altitudes. - Where's the emperor? where Kutuzov? - Rostov asked everyone who could stop, and no one could not get an answer. Finally grabbed the soldier by the collar, he forced him to answer himself. - E! brother! Too long ago there fled ahead! - said Rostov soldiers, laughing and something bursting. Leaving this soldier who was evidently drunk, Rostov stopped the horse batman or groom VIP and began questioning him. Batman Rostov announced that the emperor an hour ago, was driven at full speed in a carriage on this very road, and that the Emperor was dangerously wounded. - It can not be, - said Rostov, - true, the other one. - I myself have seen, - said the orderly with a confident grin. - Oh, I know-it's time to sovereign: think how many times in St. Petersburg That's it saw. Pale, prebledny sitting in the carriage. Quaternary black horses raced like, my dear friends, we thundered past: it's time, it seems, and the king's horses and Ilya Ivanovich know; it seems to others as the king Ilya driver does not drive. Rostov let his horse and wanted to go further. He walked past the wounded officer approached him. - Yes, you need someone? - I asked the officer. - Commander in Chief? So killed kernel chest killed in our regiment. - not killed, wounded - another officer corrected. - But who? Kutuzov? - growth in demand. - Not Kutuzov, but what's his name - well, yes all the same, not much is left alive. Go over there, over there to the village, where all gathered heads - said the officer, pointing to Gostieradek village, and passed on. Rostov rode a step, not knowing why, and to whom he now will go. The Emperor is wounded, the battle was lost. It was impossible not to believe it now. Rostov rode in the direction in which he pointed out and which could be seen in the distance and the church tower. Where he was the hurry? What he had to say now the Emperor or Kutuzov, even if they would be alive and not injured? - This way, sir, go and get killed right here, - he shouted the soldiers. - There will be killed! - ABOUT! what you say! He said another. - Where did he go? Here closer. Rostov thought, and drove it in the direction where he said that would be killed. "Now all the same: if the emperor really hurt, do I take care of myself," he thought. He moved into the space where most people died fleeing from Pratzen. The French have not occupied this place, and Russian, those who were alive or injured for a long time left him. On the field, as the stacks on a good plow, lay about ten, fifteen killed, wounded on each tithing place. The wounded crawled for two or three together, and hear the unpleasant, sometimes feigned, as it seemed to Rostov, their cries and moans. Rostov put his horse to a trot, to not see all of these suffering people, and he was afraid. He was not afraid for his life, but for the courage that he needed and which he knew would not stand these kinds of accidents. The French, who ceased to shoot over it, strewn with dead and wounded, the field, because nobody living on it was not seeing him riding on the adjutant, brought upon his gun and threw a few nuclei. A sense of whistling, scary sounds and the surrounding dead merged to Rostov in one sense of terror and regret to him. He remembered the last letter to his mother. "Whatever she felt - he thought - would stake she saw me here now on this field with guns aimed at me." In the village were Gostieradeke though tangled, but on a larger order of Russian troops marching away from the battlefield. It already did not reach the French nucleus, and gunfire seemed far away. Here everything is clear seen and said that the battle was lost. To whom neither addressed Rostov, no one could tell him where he was neither sovereign, nor where he was Kutuzov. Some said that the rumor about the wound sovereign holds, others said no, and explained this false rumor spread that, indeed, in the carriage the Emperor rode back from the battlefield, pale and frightened Chief Marshal Count Tolstoy, who went to the other in the suite Emperor on the battlefield. One officer told Rostov that outside the village, on the left, he saw some of the highest authorities, and Rostov went there, no longer hoping to find someone, but only in order to clear his conscience before himself. After passing a couple of miles and passing the last Russian troops near the garden, dug in the ditch, Rostov saw the two standing against the ditch riders. One with a white plume in his hat seemed somehow familiar to Rostov; other, unknown rider on a beautiful red horse (horse this sound familiar to Rostov) rode up to the ditch, he pushed the horse and spurs the release of the reins, easily jumped over the ditch garden. Only the land crumbled off the mound from the rear hooves of the horse. Cool horse turning it back again I jumped the ditch, and deferentially addressed the horseman with the white plumes, evidently suggesting that he do the same. The rider, whose figure seemed familiar to Rostov and somehow involuntarily riveted his attention, made a negative gesture of head and hand, and the gesture Rostov instantly recognized his lamented, beloved sovereign. "But it could not be he, alone in the middle of an empty field," thought Rostov. At that time, Alexander turned his head and Rostov saw so vividly etched in his memory favorite features. The Emperor was pale, his cheeks sunken eyes and fell; but the more charms, humility was in his speaking. Rostov was happy, making sure that the ears of the emperor wound was unfair. He was happy to have seen him. He knew he could, even had to speak directly to him and to pass on what he had been ordered to be transferred from Dolgorukov. But as the youth in love trembles and is thrilled, not daring to speak of what he dreams of the night, and frightened looks around, looking for help or possible delays and flight, when it was desired minute, and he was standing alone with her, and Rostov is now reaching that what he wanted most in the world, I did not know how to approach the emperor, and he presented a thousand reasons why it was uncomfortable, indecent and impossible. "How! I'm kind of glad of the chance to take advantage of the fact that he is one, and in dismay. He frustrating and difficult it may seem an unknown person at this moment of grief; then I can tell him now that the mere sight and dries it in my beating heart in my mouth? "None of the innumerable speeches he, turning to the Emperor, resigned in his mind, did not come to him now in the head . Those speeches for the most part kept completely under other conditions, they talk more often in the moment of victory and celebration, and mainly on the deathbed of his wounds, while the Emperor thanked him for heroic deeds, and he was dying, expressed he confirmed in fact love a. "Then, what am I going to ask the emperor about his orders to the right flank, where even now the 4th hour of the evening, and the battle is lost? - What? which is sewn here, in this little bag, Princess Mary? Nothing, nothing true except insignificance everything that I understand, and the greatness of something incomprehensible, but it's important! "Stretcher set off. At every jolt he again felt unbearable pain; fever increased, and he began to rave. Those dreams about his father, his wife, sister and future son and tenderness that he had felt the night before the battle, the figure is small, insignificant Napoleon and above all this lofty sky, formed the main basis of his delirious ideas. Quiet life and peaceful marital happiness at Bald Hills presented to him. He has already enjoyed this happiness, when suddenly he was a little Napoleon with his indifferent, limited and happy from the misfortune of others eyes, and began a doubt, flour, and only the sky promised peace. By morning, all dreams mingled and merged into the chaos and darkness of forgetfulness and oblivion, which is much more likely, in the opinion of Larrey's, Dr. Napoleon had resolved to die than recovery. - C'est un sujet nerveux et bilieux, - I said Larry, - il n'en rechappera pas. [This is a nervous and bilious, he did not recover. ] Prince Andrew, among other bad injuries, was put in the care of residents. Thank you for downloading the free e-book library ModernLib.Ru All author of the book: http://modernlib.ru/books/tolstoy_lev_nikolaevich/ The same book in other formats: http://modernlib.ru/books/tolstoy_lev_nikolaevich/voyna_i_mir_tom_1/
